Title: CoWeaver: A Bi-directional, Learnable and Explainable Matching Engine for Mixed Human-Agent Science Collaboration

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.15545v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Jul 2026 00:28:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# CoWeaver: A Bi-directional, Learnable and Explainable Matching Engine for Mixed Human-Agent Science Collaboration 

Jiayao Gu 1,2,* Kexin Chu 3,* Peidong Liu 4

Yue Yang 5 Lynn Ai 6 Qi Zhang 7 Ling Yang 8 Tianyu Shi 1

Abstract 

LLM-based agents excel at writing articles, coding and information retrieval. However, they fail to form strong collaborations within the scientific community due to the bidirec-tional, dynamic nature of the problem and a high demand of decision interpretability. We proposed C OWEAVER , a bidirectional, learn-able and explainable algorithm to match scien-tists and form strong collaborations within a human-agent network. C OWEAVER matches candidates and requesters through filling capa-bility gaps and filters candidates through a two-stage ranking step. Finally, the model explores newcomers by maintaining uncertainty-aware capability estimates and updating them through requester’s feedback. We show that the selec-tion mechanism of combining both exploration (UCB) and greedy of C OWEAVER exceeds the greedy-only mechanism - the analytical best solution - on 6 out of the 20 tasks and per-formed on par with the greedy-only mechanism in terms of selecting the best candidate. We compared C OWEAVER baselines in terms of matching quality and efficiency. C OWEAVER 

outperforms baselines on all metrics. †

1 Introduction 

Agents developed on top of Large language mod-els (LLMs) have become increasingly capable at answering questions, writing code, and retrieving information. However, these systems still struggle with collaboration-formation tasks in social and sci-entific settings where sustained coordination, incen-tive alignment, and feasibility checks are required. Recent evaluations of LLM collaboration agents          

> 1McGill University. 2Mila – Québec AI Institute.
> 3University of Connecticut. 4Sichuan University. 5Stanford University. 6Gradient. 7Independent. 8Princeton University.
> *These authors contributed equally to this work. Correspon-dence to: tianyu.shi3@mcgill.ca .
> †Code and data: https://anonymous.4open.science/ r/CoWeaver-8B0B .

show that, although promising, these systems often remain unstable under realistic coordination pres-sure and can still fail to form durable, high-value human-agent partnerships (Huang et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Jhamtani et al., 2025b). This paper studies collaboration match-ing in mixed human-agent networks, with scientific collaboration as a motivating setting. The need for such matching is especially visi-ble for early-career researchers, who often know the research bottleneck before they know the right collaborator. In a HuMAS academic collaboration-agent survey, 44% of respondents reported that they would first seek help from mentors or do-main experts when facing a bottleneck, and 81% described their most important collaborator as par-tially or highly complementary in expertise. These responses mirror the technical requirements below: collaboration matching should identify complemen-tary capabilities, reason about value to both sides, and screen feasibility rather than rank globally sim-ilar profiles. Additional motivation evidence is provided in Appendix C. Scientific work is rarely a single-agent problem. A project may require domain expertise, experi-mental infrastructure, data access, writing expe-rience, and sustained execution, while any indi-vidual researcher or agent may cover only part of this space. Existing systems only partially ad-dress this challenge. Recommender systems and multi-stakeholder recommendation model prefer-ences, exposure, cold start, and platform-side objec-tives (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005; Bobadilla et al., 2013; Abdollahpouri et al., 2020; Burke et al., 2025); expert team formation emphasizes skill coverage and collaboration structure (Lappas et al., 2009; Saeedi et al., 2025); stable and learned matching markets reason about two-sided prefer-ences under stability or uncertainty assumptions (Gale and Shapley, 1962; Li et al., 2025); and re-cent LLM-agent systems study agent coordination 1arXiv:2607.15545v1 [cs.MA] 17 Jul 2026 and human-model cooperation (Huang et al., 2025; Jhamtani et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025). Collectively, this body of work only par-tially covers the requirements for real collaboration formation: existing methods typically specialize in one or two dimensions of capability coverage, both-side value, hard feasibility constraints, or cold-start handling. What is missing is an integrated model that handles all four together for mixed human– agent matching: filling concrete capability gaps, modeling value on both sides of a match, enforcing non-negotiable feasibility constraints, and support-ing under-observed participants. This motivates the need for a dedicated matching model. The central difficulty is that collaboration for-mation is not simply a ranking problem. A suit-able candidate must be able to fill the requester’s missing capabilities, but the task must also pro-vide enough value for the candidate. Moreover, a match between the requester and the candidate changes the future state of many factors – com-munication cost, coordination friction, likelihood to complete the task, trust between collaborators, subsequent feedback and more. This makes the problem bidirectional, dynamic, and unpredictable. It also makes model’s interpretability an important factor – users are unlikely to accept collaboration suggestions unless the system can state what gap is being filled, what incentive is being satisfied, and which constraints have been checked. Our design is motivated by a simple princi-ple: a method that can actively create strong connections between potential collaborators for any specific task. Within a scientific community, this means jointly considering human researchers, proxy agents that represent user goals, service agents that provide specialized capabilities, and reusable skills that can be invoked during work. The matching engine should therefore behave less like a static recommender and more like a coordi-nation layer that observes the network, identifies complementary opportunities, filters unsafe or in-feasible links, and learns from collaboration out-comes. We introduce C OWEAVER , a bidirectional, learn-able and explainable algorithm to match requester and candidates to form strong scientific collabo-rations in a mixed scientists-agent network. The system represents humans and agents in a shared semantic state space, where each actor is repre-sented by a compact vector of capabilities, task intents, constraints, and collaboration history, esti-mates bidirectional match value with M AP SCORE ,and separates hard constraints from utility rank-ing through explicit gate variables. It then uses a two-stage pipeline: an analytical coarse stage ranks candidates efficiently by capability complementar-ity and motivation fit, while a simulation-based re-ranking stage further filters candidates according to soft traits including but not limited to time-zone dif-ference, scheduling difference, collaboration style. Finally, the model maintains uncertainty-aware ca-pability estimates and updates them from feedback, allowing cold-start candidates to be explored while gradually converging toward reliable matches. Our main contributions are: • We propose a bidirectional collaboration-matching mechanism for mixed human-agent networks, where capability gaps, participant motivation, uncertainty, and hard feasibility constraints are modeled jointly. • We design M AP SCORE and a two-stage plan-ning pipeline that combines interpretable an-alytical matching with simulation-based col-laboration assessment, aiming to balance scal-ability and process-level realism. • We implement C OWEAVER , an end-to-end matching engine for human-agent mixed net-work in science collaboration. 

2 Method 

2.1 Overview 

Given a requester u, a task T , and a candidate pool C, C OWEAVER returns either a ranked list of collaborators or a small team proposal.We re-fer to each selectable human, proxy agent, service agent, or reusable skill as a candidate . Unlike one-shot recommendation, the system is organized as a closed-loop matching pipeline: it represents heterogeneous candidates, estimates bidirectional collaboration value, decomposes scores into inter-pretable factors, plans candidate connections, re-fines promising matches through LLM D REAM -

> ING

, and updates its estimates from feedback. Figure 1 provides the design overview. We sub-sequently introduce each layer of our design from §2.2 to 2.5. The key idea is to separate fast ana-lytical matching from slower process-level reason-ing. MapScore serves as an analytical matching score for estimating whether a candidate is use-ful to the requester and whether the task is valu-able to the candidate. The closed-form attribution 2Figure 1: Overview of C OWEAVER as an bidirectional, learnable and explainable matching engine for mixed human-agent scientific collaboration. 

layer exposes which requester-side requirements and candidate-side needs drive the score. Plan-ning uses this score to construct a shortlist or team proposal, while LLM D REAMING is reserved for top candidates where communication risks, role conflicts, and priority mismatch are more conse-quential. The feedback loop then updates capability estimates, uncertainty, and scoring weights. 

2.2 Representation Layer 

Each user v is represented by capabilities, needs, and constraints: 

sv = ( Cap v, Need v).

The capability set is open-ended: 

Cap v = {(evi , p vi , σ vi )}nv

> i=1

,

where evi is a semantic embedding, pvi ∈ [0 , 1] is an estimated proficiency, and σvi is uncertainty. The needs records how much user v needs assistance in domain k:

Need v = {nkv }k=Kk=1 ∈ [0 , 1] K

This shared representation allows humans, proxy agents, service agents, and reusable skills to en-ter the same matching space while retaining type-specific constraints. A task is represented as 

T = ( GT , QT , OT , LT , XT ),

where GT is the goal, QT contains capability re-quirements, OT contains offers or incentives, LT

contains hard constraints, and XT provides context. The distinction between requirements and offers is central: requirements support requester-side gap estimation, while offers support candidate-side par-ticipation value. Additional representation details are given in Appendix B.1. 

2.3 MapScore: Bidirectional Matching 

MapScore is the core analytical matching score. It first enforces non-compensatory feasibility and then ranks feasible pairs by bidirectional collabora-tion value. It is not a similarity score; it estimates task-conditioned collaboration value by combin-ing two asymmetric questions: whether candidate covers the requester’s Need u, and whether task T

satisfies the candidate’s Need v. Formally, 

M (u, v, T ) = σ(u, v, T )

h

λS cap (u, v, T )+ (1 − λ)Sneed (v, T )

i

,

where Scap measures capability-gap coverage, 

Sneed measures participation-value fit, λ ∈ (0 , 1) 

is learned from feedback, and σ(u, v, T ) is a hard feasibility gate. For a task requirement j, we first estimate the requester’s current coverage ˜pju through semantic matching and define the residual gap as 

Gap j (u, T ) = max(0 , q j − ˜pju).

The capability term Scap then aggregates how much of this residual gap candidate v can cover. The par-ticipation term Sneed matches task offers against candidate needs, preventing the system from treat-ing candidates as passive resources. The full 3attention-based computation of both terms is pro-vided in Appendix B.1. Because both soft utility terms aggregate explicit requirement and need fac-tors, MapScore also supports the closed-form at-tribution which is further described in Appendix B.2. 

2.4 Planning and LLM Dreaming 

For one-to-one matching, the planner computes MapScore for each candidate, filters infeasible pairs, and sorts the remaining candidates by score. For one-to-N matching, the planner maintains a residual capability gap R and greedily adds the feasible candidate with the largest marginal value: 

∆( v | S ) = σ(u, v, T )

"

ρ

P 

> j

min( Rj , c jv)

P 

> j

Rj + ϵ

+ (1 − ρ)Sneed (v, T )

#

,

where ρ balances residual capability coverage and candidate-side value (Algorithm 1). 

Algorithm 1 Residual-gap team construction  

> 1:

S ← ∅; R ← Gap (u, T ) 

> 2:

while |S| < n max and ∥R∥1 > ϵ do  

> 3:

v∗ ← arg max v∈C\S ∆( v | S ) 

> 4:

if ∆( v∗ | S ) ≤ 0 then  

> 5:

break  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

S ← S ∪ { v∗} 

> 8:

Rj ← max(0 , R j − cjv∗ ) for all j 

> 9:

end while  

> 10:

return S

This residual-gap strategy gives a scalable ap-proximation to coverage-based team formation (Lappas et al., 2009). Analytical scores are efficient, but collabora-tion can still fail due to soft process-level factors. We therefore apply LLM D REAMING . For each requester–candidate pair, we instantiate two role-conditioned agents using their structured profiles: capabilities, needs, availability, timezone, dead-line pressure, collaboration style, communication preference, personality notes, and ranked priori-ties. The agents conduct a short simulated nego-tiation about the target task, including concrete work-allocation tradeoffs over a 100-point effort budget, so that the model can expose latent frictions not captured by the analytical score alone. The dreamed interaction is then judged along four soft-compatibility dimensions: time/energy feasibility 

γv– whether the candidate’s stated availability sup-ports the task workload, priority or goal alignment 

αv–whether the requester and candidate agree on what matters for the collaboration, collaboration-style κv (e.g., async vs. synchronous work, struc-tured vs. flexible execution), and personality fit 

ϕv–whether their negotiation and communication styles are mutually productive rather than one-sided or conflict-prone. The judge returns a simulated score Ssim (u, v, T ) together with a risk, and syn-ergy recommendation (Fig. 1): 

Ssim = 0 .50 ϕv + 0 .20 κv + 0 .20 αv + 0 .10 γv,

The final ranking is 

R(a) = ηM a + (1 − η)Ssim (u, v, T ), η ∈ [0 , 1] ,

where Ma is the analytical score of the candidate or team. The output includes the ranked suggestion together with covered gaps, satisfied needs, passed constraints, and simulation-identified risks. 

2.5 Feedback Learning and Exploration 

The output of the LLM dreaming stage is presented to the requester as a ranked set of candidate recom-mendation cards. For each candidate, the interface displays the final score, the analytical matching components –capability-gap coverage and need sat-isfaction, the LLM-derived synergy and risk labels. The requester then provides feedback through: ac-cepting, skipping, or rejecting a candidate. These actions are mapped into a structured reward sig-nal used by the online-learning module: The final scalar reward is computed as 

R = rfb + λ1reff + λ2rqual 

1 + λ1 + λ2

,

where rfb is the immediate user reaction, reff 

measures interaction efficiency, and rqual captures completion- and rating-based quality. This reward is then used to update the candidate’s Bayesian capability estimates and selection counts, so sub-sequent recommendations reflect the requester’s observed preferences. This feedback updates three parts of the matcher. First, capability-specific ev-idence updates proficiency and uncertainty esti-mates, so under-observed capabilities become more certain as they are validated. Second, the balance parameter λ is updated to reflect whether capabil-ity coverage or participation value better predicts 4success in the current environment. Third, candi-date retrieval uses uncertainty-aware exploration to reduce cold-start lockout. Concretely, retrieval can use an upper-confidence selection heuristic (Auer et al., 2002): 

Select t(v) = M (u, v, T ) + c ¯σv

s

log( t + 1) 

nv + 1 ,

where ¯σv is the candidate’s mean uncertainty and 

nv is the number of previous interactions. This heuristic gives new or under-observed humans, agents, and skills a chance to enter the shortlist, while posterior updates gradually shift the system from exploration toward exploitation. Detailed up-date equations are provided in Appendix B.3. 

3 Evaluation 

We evaluate C OWEAVER as a task-conditioned col-laboration matcher along four questions. First, we test whether analytical online selection can recover high-quality collaborators under a limited interac-tion budget. Second, we examine whether LLM DREAMING improves process-level feasibility be-yond capability matching. Third, we test whether MapScore explanations are faithful to the analyti-cal matching decision. Finally, we compare against a negotiation-style agentic baseline to assess end-to-end matching quality and efficiency. 

Research questions. RQ1 asks whether analyt-ical online selection can recover high-quality col-laborators under limited rounds. RQ2 asks whether LLM D REAMING improves collaboration feasi-bility beyond capability matching. RQ3 asks whether MapScore explanations faithfully identify decision-relevant matching factors. RQ4 asks how COWEAVER compares with a negotiation-style agentic baseline. 

3.1 Setup Protocol. All experiments use the same suite of 20 matching tasks. Unless otherwise stated, capa-bility outcomes use noise-free oracle observations. RQ1 uses up to 25 rounds, while RQ2 uses up to 30 rounds with consensus defined as three consecutive selections of the same candidate. The LLM com-ponent in LLM D REAMING is instantiated with 

GPT-4o .

Methods. We evaluate UCB + Scap Greedy, Scap 

Greedy only, and Random matching (mean over seeds). Dreaming ablation compares G REEDY and GREEDY + LLM D REAMING . For benchmarking we additionally compare with an AgenticPay-style negotiation baseline. This baseline adapts the ne-gotiation setting of AgenticPay (Liu et al., 2026) to collaboration matching, with additional motiva-tion from multi-user coordination settings such as PeopleJoin (Jhamtani et al., 2025b). 

Metrics. We report quality and efficiency met-rics that separate match quality from online search cost. For quality, we compute the oracle op-timum Moptimum from ground-truth capabilities using the fixed evaluation weight vector θ =[0 .4, −0.1] . We report three recovery measures: 

ρmode = M (mode candidate , true caps )/M optimum ,

ρlast = M (last candidate , true caps )/M optimum ,and Hit rate, the fraction of tasks in which the ana-lytical optimum is selected before the round budget expires. For efficiency, we report the first-optimum round, the first consensus round at which the same candidate is selected K = 3 consecutive times, and rounds-to-threshold metrics for ρ ≥ 0.95 and 

ρ ≥ 0.99 . For explanation faithfulness, we report perturbation-based score and decision effects, to-gether with oracle-alignment metrics that compare the top-attributed factor with the strongest single-factor intervention. Events that are not reached are capped at the corresponding round budget. Inspired by AgenticPay (Liu et al., 2026), we investigated in the effect of users’ personality in reaching consensus in LLM dreaming and com-pared it with pure Greedy selection on capability matches. We built a look-up table that contains the Global Score we obtained by evaluating Agen-ticPay on different combinations of personalities: Cooperative, Competitive, Analytical, Agreeable and Strategic. Here we adapted Global Score de-fined in (Liu et al., 2026) to 

G = d · (D + Q · W + E)

where d = γt−1, discount factor γ; negotiation success reward D, negotiation quality reward W ,round efficiency reward E. Q = 4 · rb · rs where 

rb ← (pmax − p)/Z and rs ← (p − pmin )/Z ,

p =price, pmax = candidate’s max commitment score and pmin = requester’s min commitment score. Default values for the parameters can be found in Table B.7. All variables inherit the same values from AgenticPay’s default settings. We 5recorded the score in Table B.5. We compute an average top-3 compatibility (TKC) score under the look-up table: 

TKC( u) = 13

X

> v∈top-3 (u)

C∗(pu, p v). (1) where C∗(pu, p v) is the look-up table score be-tween a candidate with personality pu and a re-quester with personality pv. We additionally report Dream Score Ssim - the LLM judge’s self-rated compatibility- to diagnose calibration. Note that the scores are calculated based on the separate AgentPay datasets(Liu et al., 2026), therefore the table is completely unknown to our model. 

Benchmark. The evaluation set is fully synthetic and was generated by the simulator rather than collected from real users or manually annotated examples. The set was produced with a fixed ran-dom seed (42) and the mock backend that sampled from manually specified pools and ranges of the following traits: task titles, domains, role labels, skill vocabularies, capability values, candidates’ and requesters’ needs, requester profiles, candidate profiles, candidate cards, and latent context vari-ables in the generation script, along with candidate capabilities centered around each task’s required skills plus random perturbations. We then assigned each task’s candidates evenly to four pre-specified experience tiers and add Cap prior (μinit , σ init )

while leaving the original candidate capabilities as ground truth. In total, the benchmark com-prises 20 tasks, each pairing one requester with a pool of 20 candidates, yielding 20 × 20 = 400 

requester–candidate pairs: the 20 tasks constitute independent matching episodes used as the paired unit for our significance tests, while the 400 pairs are the match evaluations underlying the aggregate quality and efficiency metrics. 

3.2 Online Selection 

To answer RQ1, we first isolate the analytical se-lector without LLM D REAMING . This setting con-tains 20 tasks with 20 candidates per task, yielding 400 task–candidate matches (Section 3.1). The ora-cle condition sets each prior mean to the true candi-date mean, corresponding to zero prior noise. Un-der a 25-round budget, the standard UCB warmup ("try each unseen candidate once" bonus) already consumes most of the interaction budget when there are 20 candidates,leaving limited opportunity for exploitation. After adding tiered capabilities standard devia-tions and new candidate match score bonus, we observed that (1) Exploration until consensus de-creased resulted in less exploration on newcomers but faster commit, (2) number of rounds to the first optimal pick decreased from 25 to around 11. (3) Before adding tiered standard deviation, quality of UCB + Scap Greedy is ρmode = 0 .869 . After adding tiered capabilities standard deviations, qual-ity of UCB + Scap Greedy is much closer to the analytical best Scap Greedy – ρmode = 0 .983 for 

Scap Greedy vs 0.953 for UCB + Scap Greedy (Ta-ble B.3). We also observed that our approach of combin-ing UCB + Scap Greedy exceeds Scap Greedy-only mechanism on 6 of the 20 tasks and exceeds the random mechanism - mean selection over 5 seeds - on 10 out of 20 tasks (Figure 2 A). In terms of quality, we reported ρmode on all 20 tasks and ob-served that UCB + Scap Greedy again exceeds Scap 

Greedy-only on 6/20 tasks and exceeds random on 15/20 (Figure 2 B). The distribution of ρmode from UCB + Scap Greedy is much closer to Scap Greedy with P-value = 0.049. 

3.3 Effect of LLM Dreaming 

To answer RQ2, we evaluate whether LLM DREAMING improves process-level feasibility once the analytical selector is already strong. The ablation uses the same 20 tasks and online-loop protocol, with at most 30 rounds per task and con-sensus declared after three consecutive selections of the same candidate. The capability oracle is used only for evaluation. We compare two vari-ants: G REEDY , which selects by analytical Map-Score, and G REEDY + LLM D REAMING , which reranks the shortlist using simulation compatibility and time-aware feasibility features. Table 1 shows that analytical G REEDY remains strongest on capability-oriented outcomes: it has higher ρmode , ρlast , and higher oracle hit rates than G REEDY + LLM D REAMING . This is ex-pected because MapScore directly optimizes the same capability signal as the oracle. At the same time, G REEDY + LLM D REAMING substantially improves collaboration, time feasibility, and com-bined utility, indicating that Dreaming contributes mainly to process-level feasibility while introduc-ing some capability tradeoff. We therefore treat Dreaming as a feasibility-aware correction layer rather than a replacement for analytical MapScore. 6Method ρmode ρlast Hit mode Hit last Cmode Tmode Usable Ucomb                  

> GREEDY 0.9763 0.9730 0.35 0.30 0.6145 0.5862 0.45 0.8649 GREEDY + LLM D REAMING 0.9575 0.9595 0.15 0.15 0.8000 0.7400 0.90 0.9042

Table 1: Dreaming ablation under the official online-loop protocol. ρmode and ρlast are normalized true MatchScore values for the modal and final selected candidates. Hit rates measure exact recovery of the oracle candidate. Cmode 

is the Dreaming collaboration score, Tmode is the deterministic time-match score, Usable is the fraction of tasks whose selected candidate exceeds the time-feasibility threshold, and Ucomb is combined utility. 

Figure 2: Selection on 20 matching tasks shows that tiered capability uncertainty improves both matching efficiency and quality under a limited round budget. A) Rounds to first optimal pick. B) Matching quality measured by ρmode . C) ρmode distribution across tasks. P-values are calculated by Mann-Whitney U Test and are corrected by sample size. * means p-value ≤ 0.05 and *** means p-value ≤ 0.001. 

3.4 Faithfulness Evaluation of MapScore Explanations 

To answer RQ3, we evaluate whether the factors surfaced by the MapScore decomposition are faith-ful to the analytical matching decision. For each task, we rank candidates using deterministic Map-Score, explain the top-ranked candidate, and per-turb factors from its explanation. For a factor f , we define the deletion effect as 

∆( f ) = M (x) − M (x\f ),

where requirement factors zero the linked candi-date capability and need factors zero the linked task offer. We report the resulting score drop and whether the original winner remains Top-1 after full-pool re-ranking. We compare the top-attributed factor with a ran-dom positive factor and a single-factor perturbation oracle: 

f ⋆ 

> oracle

= arg max  

> f

∆( f ), ORat = ∆( ftop )∆( f ⋆

> oracle

) + ϵ .

The oracle enumerates atomic interventions over winner capabilities and task offers. We also report OMatch, whether the explanation and oracle select the same intervention, and ORank, the rank of ftop 

among all oracle interventions. We evaluate four conditions: T IERED ORIGI -

> NAL

, the original 20-task benchmark; C ONTRAST 

BENCHMARK , a less saturated diagnostic set with diversified candidate archetypes and randomized slots; C ONTRAST + SBERT, the same contrast set with the SBERT/BGE encoder; and F AILURE 

CASE , a controlled set with single off-topic needs and no directly matching offers. Table 2 shows that attribution is most informa-tive on the contrast benchmark: top-attributed fac-tors outperform random factors in both score drop and ranking flip, and match the strongest single-factor oracle intervention. The trend remains un-der SBERT/BGE, with only one oracle mismatch across 20 tasks. The tiered benchmark mainly serves as a saturation diagnostic. The Failure Case gives the intended reversal: top-attributed factors no longer outperform random factors, and oracle agreement drops sharply. This is the expected boundary case. A single off-topic need can receive high score share through attention matching, while perturbing its linked offer may have little effect when attention moves to substitute offers. We provide the derivation and examples in Appendix B.4. Finally, we repeat random and shuffled baselines over five seeds on the Contrast Benchmark. The 7Condition Sat. ↓ Gap ↑ TDrop ↑ RDrop TFlip ↑ RFlip ORat ↑ OMatch ↑ ORank ↓                                    

> Tiered Original 0.94 0.021 0.528 0.150 1.00 0.95 0.981 0.95 1.05 Contrast Benchmark 0.07 0.071 0.368 0.155 0.95 0.65 1.000 1.00 1.00 Contrast + SBERT 0.08 0.065 0.347 0.152 0.95 0.70 1.000 0.95 1.05 Failure Case 0.04 0.140 0.092 0.171 0.10 0.50 0.291 0.10 3.70

Table 2: Faithfulness evaluation. Sat. is the fraction of candidates with saturated Scap ; Gap is the winner-runner-up score gap. TDrop/RDrop and TFlip/RFlip compare top-attributed and random-factor perturbations. ORat, OMatch, and ORank compare the top-attributed factor with the strongest single-factor oracle intervention. 

task set is fixed, and the seed controls factor sam-pling. The main metrics remain stable: RDrop is 

0.1673 ± 0.0131 , RFlip is 0.6800 ± 0.0748 , and ORat remains 1.0000 .

3.5 Benchmark C OWEAVER against human-agent networks 

To answer RQ4, we compare C OWEAVER with an AgenticPay (Liu et al., 2026) negotiation baseline, as well as PeopleJoin (Jhamtani et al., 2025a) on 20 tasks with 3 candidates per task. For AgenticPay, we switched the role of seller to requester and the role of buyer to candidates, and trading deals to collaboration negotiation tasks. Then we asked it to match requester and candidates one by one to match the requester with the best candidate by com-puting quality score of the negotiation (Liu et al., 2026). We evaluated both methods on both match-ing quality and efficiency metrics (Methods 3.1). We observed that C OWEAVER exceeds AgenticPay on all metrics (Table B.4). 

3.6 Personality Compatibility Evaluation 

The MapScore selector in COWEAVER is capability-driven and explicitly personality-blind .We hypothesize that adding LLM dreaming as a re-ranking stage allows the system to identify personality-driven collaboration risks that capabil-ity scoring cannot capture. We use a pre-computed 

5×5 Global Score matrix from A GENTIC PAY (Liu et al., 2026), an independent structured negotiation simulator, as held-out ground truth for personality compatibility (Table B.5). We construct 25 match-ing tasks: 5 requester personalities × 5 task in-stances per personality, yielding 5 tasks per person-ality and 25 tasks in total. Each task consists of one requester and a candidate pool of size 5, with one candidate per personality. To isolate personality-driven selection, all candidates have identical ca-pability vectors so that the analytical MapScore is constant across the pool. We compare two selec-tion mechanism: G REEDY : ranks candidates by analytical MapScore M ; D REAMING : simulates a three-turn agent-agent negotiation for each can-didate using GPT-4.1 , then ranks by a weighted combination of M and the LLM-judged compatibil-ity, e.g. Ssim (50/50). The top-3 ranked candidates form the final selection (Table B.6). Dreaming im-proves over Greedy on 3/5 = 60% personalities in terms of TKC, and 4/5 = 80% personalities in terms of Ssim . Dreaming surfaces personality signal that capability scoring cannot. On 3 of 5 requester per-sonalities, Dreaming improves top-3 compatibility by +0 .042 to +0 .071 (Table B.6). The strongest case is Competitive ( TKC = 0 .988 ). The dis-agreement between Dreaming and Greedy is the strongest when requester personality is Agreeable. This is because LLM dreaming only detects agree-ment but does not detect a fair agreement - an agreeable requester agrees with candidates immedi-ately but the requester is actually exploited (Figure B.3). 

4 Conclusion 

We studied collaboration matching in mixed human-agent networks as a task-conditioned prob-lem of bidirectional fit rather than a static rank-ing of globally strong collaborators. We intro-duced C OWEAVER , which represents tasks and candidates through explicit needs, offers, and ca-pabilities, scores matches with feasibility-gated MapScore, updates selections through online ex-ploration, uses LLM D REAMING to account for process-level feasibility, and exposes decision fac-tors through a closed-form explanation decomposi-tion. Across the evaluation, analytical online selec-tion recovered high-quality collaborators under lim-ited interaction budgets, while LLM D REAMING 

improved collaboration and time feasibility even when it introduced a small capability-optimality tradeoff. Perturbation-based diagnostics further showed that the highlighted MapScore factors align with decision-relevant interventions in the main contrast setting. Compared with an AgenticPay-style negotiation baseline, C OWEAVER achieved stronger quality and efficiency in the adapted col-8laboration benchmark. Our results establish a foundation for explicitly modeling bidirectional, feasibility-gated and uncertainty-aware collabora-tion. This mechanism is worth carrying into real-world scientific projects with human participants and observing long-term collaboration outcomes. 

Limitations 

Several limitations remain. First, our experiments use a controlled 20-task suite with finite candidate pools and, unless otherwise stated, noise-free ora-cle capability observations; this design isolates the matching mechanism but does not capture all un-certainty in real deployments, including noisy feed-back, strategic behavior, and long-term relation-ship dynamics. Second, C OWEAVER depends on explicit task and candidate representations, which make MapScore interpretable but may omit softer collaboration factors such as trust, communica-tion style, availability, institutional constraints, and evolving preferences. Third, LLM D REAMING 

is currently used as a feasibility-aware reranking layer rather than a full structured social simula-tion. Prior work suggests that LLM agents with debate and reflection can exhibit richer collabo-rative behaviors such as consensus reaching and conformity (Zhang et al., 2024), suggesting that fu-ture versions could stress-test requester–candidate fit with explicit roles such as a requester, candi-date, constraint checker, and mediator. Finally, our AgenticPay-style comparison adapts a negotia-tion framework to collaboration matching, so the benchmark result should be interpreted as evidence against this adapted negotiation baseline rather than as a claim about all agentic matching systems. Fu-ture work should therefore evaluate C OWEAVER in noisier deployments, with richer social simulation, broader baselines, and longer-horizon collaboration outcomes. 

Author Contributions 

Jiayao Gu (Conceptualization[equal], Method-ology[equal], Software[equal], Formal analy-sis[equal], Data Curation[Lead], Writing-Original Draft[equal], Writing-Review & Editing[equal], Visualization[Lead], Supervision[lead], Project administration [Lead]), Kexin Chu (Concep-tualization[equal], Methodology[equal], Soft-ware[equal], Formal analysis[equal], Writing-Original Draft[equal], Writing-Review & Edit-ing[equal]), Peidong Liu (Methodology[equal], Software[equal], Formal analysis[equal], Writ-ing - Original Draft[equal], Writing-Review & Editing[equal]), Yue Yang (Funding acquisi-tion[minor]), Lynn Ai (Funding acquisition[Lead]), Qi Zhang (Writing-Original Draft[minor]), Ling Yang (Conceptualization[minor]), Tianyu Shi (Conceptualization[Lead], Project administra-tion[minor]). 9References 

Himan Abdollahpouri, Gediminas Adomavicius, Robin Burke, Ido Guy, Dietmar Jannach, Toshihiro Kamishima, Jan Krasnodebski, and Luiz Pizzato. 2020. Multistakeholder recommendation: Survey and research directions. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction , 30(1):127–158. Gediminas Adomavicius and Alexander Tuzhilin. 2005. Toward the next generation of recommender systems: A survey of the state of the art and possible exten-sions. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 17(6):734–749. Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. 2002. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed ban-dit problem. Machine Learning , 47(2–3):235–256. Jesus Bobadilla, Fernando Ortega, Antonio Hernando, and Ana Gutiérrez. 2013. Recommender systems survey. Knowledge-Based Systems , 46:109–132. Robin Burke, Gediminas Adomavicius, Toine Bogers, Tommaso Di Noia, Dominik Kowald, Julia Neid-hardt, Ozlem Ozgobek, Maria Soledad Pera, Nava Tintarev, and Juergen Ziegler. 2025. De-centering the (traditional) user: Multistakeholder evaluation of recommender systems. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies , 203:103560. Kexin Chu, Zecheng Lin, Dawei Xiang, Zixu Shen, Jian-chang Su, Cheng Chu, Yiwei Yang, Wenhui Zhang, Wenfei Wu, and Wei Zhang. 2025a. Selective Kv-cache sharing to mitigate timing side-channels in LLM inference. arXiv preprint .Kexin Chu, Zixu Shen, Sheng-Ru Cheng, Dawei Xiang, Ziqin Liu, and Wei Zhang. 2025b. Mcam: Efficient llm inference with multi-tier kv cache management. In 2025 IEEE 45th International Conference on Dis-tributed Computing Systems (ICDCS) , pages 571– 581. IEEE. Kexin Chu, Dawei Xiang, and Wei Zhang. 2026. Latency-quality routing for functionally equivalent tools in llm agents. arXiv preprint .David Gale and Lloyd S. Shapley. 1962. College ad-missions and the stability of marriage. The American Mathematical Monthly , 69(1):9–15. Chen Huang, Yang Deng, Wenqiang Lei, Jiancheng Lv, Tat-Seng Chua, and Jimmy Xiangji Huang. 2025. How to enable effective cooperation between humans and NLP models: A survey of principles, formaliza-tions, and beyond. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 466–488. Harsh Jhamtani, Jacob Andreas, and Ben Van Durme. 2025a. Lm agents for coordinating multi-user infor-mation gathering. In ACL .Harsh Jhamtani, Jacob Andreas, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2025b. LLM agents for coordinating multi-user information gathering. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 17800–17826. Theodoros Lappas, Lukasz Liu, and Evimaria Terzi. 2009. Finding a team of experts in social networks. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD Interna-tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , pages 467–476. Shuai Li, Zilong Wang, and Fang Kong. 2025. A survey on bandit learning in matching markets. In Proceed-ings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence , pages 10546–10554. Xianyang Liu, Shangding Gu, and Dawn Song. 2026. Agenticpay: A multi-agent llm negotiation system for buyer-seller transactions. Mahdis Saeedi, Hawre Hosseini, Christine Wong, and Hossein Fani. 2025. A survey of subgraph optimiza-tion for expert team formation. ACM Computing Surveys , 57(12):1–40. Haochen Sun, Shuwen Zhang, Lujie Niu, Lei Ren, Hao Xu, Hao Fu, Fangkun Zhao, Caixia Yuan, and Xiaojie Wang. 2025. Collab-overcooked: Benchmarking and evaluating large language models as collaborative agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 4922–4951. Song Wang, Zhen Tan, Zihan Chen, Shuang Zhou, Tian-long Chen, and Jundong Li. 2025. AnyMAC: Cascad-ing flexible multi-agent collaboration via next-agent prediction. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 11555–11567. Ningning Xu, Yuxuan Jiang, Shubhashis Dipta Roy, and Hengyuan Zhang. 2025. Learning how to use tools, not just when: Pattern-aware tool-integrated reasoning. Workshop paper. Jintian Zhang, Xin Xu, Ningyu Zhang, Ruibo Liu, Bryan Hooi, and Shumin Deng. 2024. Exploring collaboration mechanisms for llm agents: A social psychology view. 

10 A Additional Background and Related Work 

A.1 Collaboration Matching as Bidirectional Fit 

Collaboration matching differs from standard rec-ommendation because the value of a match is task-conditioned and bidirectional. A requester may need collaborators who cover concrete missing ca-pabilities, but a candidate also needs the task to pro-vide sufficient value, appropriate incentives, and feasible working conditions. A high-capability can-didate is therefore not necessarily a good collab-orator for a given task if the task does not satisfy the candidate’s needs or violates hard constraints such as access, consent, availability, or conflict-of-interest requirements. This motivates modeling collaboration as a constrained fit between requester gaps, candidate offers, candidate needs, and task-level feasibility. This view is especially important in mixed human-agent networks. Human researchers, proxy agents, service agents, and reusable skills may all be selectable candidates, but they differ in capa-bility uncertainty, interaction cost, reliability, and permissible use. A useful matching system must therefore handle cold-start candidates, update un-certain estimates from feedback, and provide in-terpretable reasons for each recommendation. In COWEAVER , these requirements motivate bidirec-tional MapScore, hard feasibility gates, uncertainty-aware online exploration, and explanation decom-position. 

A.2 Relation to Existing Matching and Agent Systems 

Recommender systems provide a broad founda-tion for ranking items or people under user pref-erences, feedback, cold start, and platform objec-tives (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005; Bobadilla et al., 2013). Multi-stakeholder recommendation further emphasizes that recommendations can af-fect multiple parties with different utilities and fair-ness concerns (Abdollahpouri et al., 2020; Burke et al., 2025). These perspectives are relevant to col-laboration formation, but they do not directly model whether a candidate fills a task-specific capability gap while also receiving sufficient participation value from the task. Expert team formation and matching markets are also closely related. Team formation work studies how to assemble groups with appropriate skills and collaboration structure (Lappas et al., 2009; Saeedi et al., 2025), while stable and learned matching methods reason about two-sided preferences, sta-bility, or uncertainty (Gale and Shapley, 1962; Li et al., 2025). C OWEAVER differs by focusing on task-conditioned collaboration edges rather than global compatibility: each match is evaluated by residual requester needs, candidate-side value, hard feasibility constraints, and online uncertainty. Recent LLM-agent work studies multi-agent co-ordination, human-agent collaboration, planning, and information gathering (Huang et al., 2025; Jhamtani et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025; Sun et al., 2025). These systems show that LLM agents can support complex collaborative workflows, but they typically do not provide an explicit, learnable, and decomposable matching score for deciding which human, agent, or skill should be connected to a task. COWEAVER is complementary: it treats match-ing as the upstream decision problem that selects promising collaborators before downstream coordi-nation occurs. Work on tool use and efficient agent execution highlights another relevant dimension: agents often need to choose among functionally related capa-bilities under latency, reliability, and resource con-straints (Xu et al., 2025; Chu et al., 2026, 2025b,a). In our setting, such constraints appear as part of candidate feasibility and process-level collabora-tion risk. The goal of C OWEAVER is not to re-place planning or tool-use policies, but to provide a task-conditioned matching layer that can explain, update, and filter collaboration candidates before expensive interaction or simulation. 

Baseline landscape. Table A.1 summarizes the baseline landscape behind our evaluation design. We did not find a prior system that directly im-plements task-conditioned scientific collaboration matching over mixed human-agent candidates. Recommendation and multistakeholder RecSys provide ranking, exposure, and cold-start founda-tions, but do not directly model task-specific miss-ing capabilities or feasibility-gated collaboration edges. Expert team formation is the closest classi-cal formulation for skill coverage and team struc-ture, yet it assumes human expert pools and does not model candidate-side value, online uncertainty, or mixed human-agent candidates. Two-sided and bandit matching markets provide preference-learning theory, but their preferences are not de-composed into semantic capability gaps, task of-11 fers, hard gates, and explanation factors. LM-agent coordination systems study collaborative execu-tion, teammate discovery, and communication pro-tocols, but typically start after agents or users have been selected. Among these, PeopleJoin (Jham-tani et al., 2025a) is directly runnable as an LLM-agent baseline for our setting: it coordinates multi-user information gathering by identifying which users are likely to hold the requested informa-tion, which we adapt to collaboration matching by treating candidate profiles as the queryable knowl-edge sources and asking the coordinator to identify which candidate best fills a requester’s task. Agen-ticPay (Liu et al., 2026) provides the closest exe-cutable agentic negotiation comparison: it supports multi-round negotiation with private constraints and valuations, and we adapt its buyer-seller in-teraction into requester-candidate collaboration for RQ4. We therefore evaluate internal selector abla-tions for the components that can be isolated and use PeopleJoin and the AgenticPay-style negotia-tion as the two closest runnable comparisons, while treating the remaining rows as adjacent problem families rather than direct drop-in baselines. In the compact matrix, Gap denotes capability-gap mod-eling, Value denotes two-sided value, Hard denotes hard feasibility constraints, and Online denotes on-line or cold-start support; ✓ marks a central ob-jective, ◦ marks partial support, and × marks a non-central criterion.                                 

> Approach Gap Value Hard Online
> RecSys / multi-stake. ◦◦◦✓
> Team formation ✓×◦×
> Two-sided / bandit ×✓◦✓
> LLM-agent coordination ◦×◦×
> PeopleJoin ◦×◦×
> AgenticPay-style ×✓✓×
> COWEAVER ✓✓✓✓

Table A.1: Baseline matrix. PeopleJoin and AgenticPay-style are the two runnable comparison baselines. 

12 B Additional Method Details 

B.1 Attention-Based Semantic Matching 

We instantiate capability and offer matching with attention over open-set semantic items. Task re-quirements are written as 

QT = {(qj , q j , w Tj )}mj=1 ,

where qj is a requirement embedding, qj is the re-quired level, and wTj is its task-specific importance. Candidate needs and task offers are written as 

Need v = {(zvl , n vl )}hv

> l=1

, OT = {(ok, o k)}rk=1 .

For each task requirement qj , requester-side cov-erage is computed by attention over requester capa-bilities: 

αui,j = exp(sim( qj , eui )/τ )

P 

> k

exp(sim( qj , euk )/τ ) ,

˜pju = X

> i

αui,j pui .

Candidate-side proficiency and uncertainty are computed analogously as ˜pjv and ˜σjv. We use an optimistic coverage estimate 

cjv = min(1 , ˜pjv + βt ˜σjv),

where βt controls uncertainty-aware optimism. The capability-gap score is 

Scap (u, v, T ) = 

P 

> j

wTj min(Gap j (u, T ), c jv)

P 

> j

wTj Gap j (u, T ) + ϵ .

For participation-value fit, each candidate need attends over task offers: 

γvk,l = exp(sim( zvl , ok)/τ o)

P 

> k′

exp(sim( zvl , ok′ )/τ o) ,

ˆoTl = X

> k

γvk,l ok.

To ensure mutual benefit, we quantify how well a task satisfies a researcher’s needs. We first compute the benefit vector offered by task T as okT = α ·QkT ,then define the need fulfillment score as 

Sneed (v, T ) = 

PKk=1 min( okT , , n kv ) · wk

PKk=1 nkv · wk + ϵ ,

which measures the weighted fraction of researcher 

v’s needs that the task can satisfy, capped at actual need levels to avoid over-counting. This score lies in [0 , 1] and guarantees that high-scoring matches are attractive to both parties. 

B.2 Closed-form of MapScore 

MapScore can be decomposed over the same ex-plicit factors used for matching. For each feasible match, we attribute the final score to requester-side requirement contributions and candidate-side need contributions. For the capability term, let aj be the normalized importance of requirement j, and let Gap j (u, T )

be the residual capability gap of requester u on task T . Given candidate v’s soft coverage cjv of requirement j, the useful coverage is capped by the requester gap: 

Cover j (u, v, T ) = min  cjv, Gap j (u, T ) .

The capability score is 

Scap (u, v, T ) = 

P 

> j

aj Cover j (u, v, T )

P 

> j

aj Gap j (u, T ) + ϵ .

Therefore, the contribution of requirement j to the final MapScore is 

Creq  

> j

(u, v, T ) = σ(u, v, T )λ aj Cover j (u, v, T )

P 

> k

akGap k(u, T ) + ϵ .

This term measures how much the match score depends on candidate v’s coverage of a specific requester-side gap. For the need term, let ρℓ be the intensity of can-didate need ℓ, and let ˜oℓ be the attention-weighted value provided by task offers. The satisfied need value is 

Sat ℓ(v, T ) = min (˜ oℓ, ρ ℓ) .

The need score is 

Sneed (v, T ) = 

P 

> ℓ

Sat ℓ(v, T )ρℓ

P 

> ℓ

ρ2 

> ℓ

+ ϵ .

The corresponding need-level contribution is 

Cneed  

> ℓ

(u, v, T ) = σ(u, v, T )(1 − λ) Sat ℓ(v, T )ρℓ

P 

> k

ρ2 

> k

+ ϵ .

This term measures how much the score depends on task T ’s satisfaction of a specific candidate-side participation need. For each feasible pair (u, v, T ), we collect all positive contribution terms 

F+(u, v, T ) = {Creq  

> j

> 0}j ∪ { Cneed  

> ℓ

> 0}ℓ,

and define the top-attributed factor as 

ftop = arg max   

> f∈F +

Cf .

The explanation returned with a match consists of the dominant covered requirements, the dominant satisfied needs, the top-attributed factor, and the feasibility gate status. 13 B.3 Feedback Update Equations 

When feedback provides evidence about a capa-bility item, we update its proficiency and uncer-tainty with a Gaussian posterior update. For an observation xt with noise variance σ2obs and prior 

(μvi,t , (σvi,t )2),

μvi,t +1 = μvi,t /(σvi,t )2 + xt/σ 2obs 

1/(σvi,t )2 + 1 /σ 2obs 

,

(σvi,t +1 )2 = 1(σvi,t )2 + 1

σ2obs 

!−1

.

We update the balance parameter λ by minimiz-ing prediction loss between observed collaboration outcome M and predicted map score ˆM :

Lt = ( M − ˆM )2,

ˆM = λS cap (u, v, T ) + (1 − λ)Sneed (v, T )

θ ← θ − η∇θL − λ(θ − θprior )

B.4 Explanation Faithfulness Protocol and Diagnostics Scoring and perturbation protocol. Faithful-ness tests use deterministic MapScore with explo-ration disabled. For each task, we rank all can-didates, explain the top-ranked candidate v⋆, and evaluate interventions on its positive explanation factors F+(u, v ⋆, T ) defined in Section 3.4. We use the largest-contribution factor as ftop , sample 

frand from the same positive factor set, and use the smallest positive factor only for supplementary diagnostics. For a factor f , the deletion effect is 

∆( f ) = M (x) − M (x\f ),

where x\f weakens the primitive linked to f . A requirement factor zeros the linked candidate ca-pability proficiency, pv⋆ 

> i

← 0; a need factor zeros the linked task offer strength, sr ← 0. After each perturbation, we recompute MapScore for the full candidate pool and record both the score drop and whether the original winner remains Top-1. 

Single-factor perturbation oracle. Random fac-tors test whether the explanation is better than arbi-trary factor selection. We additionally use a stricter single-factor oracle. Let 

I(u, v ⋆, T ) = {pv⋆ 

> i

← 0 : i ∈ Cap v⋆ }∪ { sr ← 0 : r ∈ OT }.

be the set of atomic interventions available to the explanation. The oracle intervention is 

f ⋆ 

> oracle

= arg max    

> f∈I (u,v ⋆,T )

∆( f ).

We report three oracle metrics. First, 

ORat = ∆( ftop )∆( f ⋆

> oracle

) + ϵ .

Second, OMatch checks whether the explanation and the oracle select the same atomic intervention: 

OMatch = I [π(ftop ) = π(f ⋆

> oracle

)] ,

where π(f ) maps an explanation factor to its linked capability or offer intervention. Third, ORank is the rank of the explanation factor among all oracle-enumerated interventions: 

ORank = 1+ 

{f ∈ I (u, v ⋆, T ) : ∆( f ) > ∆( ftop )} .

Diagnostic benchmark construction. The origi-nal tiered benchmark is useful for evaluating match-ing quality, but it is often saturated for capability explanations: many candidates already cover most requester-side gaps. We therefore construct a con-trastive faithfulness benchmark at the same 20-task scale. Each task contains candidates drawn from several archetypes, summarized in Table B.1. Can-didate slots are randomized, and the intended win-ner archetype is recorded in task metadata. This prevents the diagnostic from depending on a fixed candidate position or a single winner profile. The failure benchmark contains controlled tasks designed to expose a boundary of share-based attri-bution. Each candidate has a single high-intensity need that is off-topic with respect to the task of-fers. The task offers contain no direct semantic counterpart to that need. This setting encourages replaceable attention links: the explanation may assign high contribution to the need through its current matched offer, while perturbing that offer may simply move attention to other weakly related offers. 

Why the failure case breaks share-based attri-bution. The failure mechanism follows from the capped need satisfaction term. For a candidate with a single need of intensity ρ,

Sneed (v, T ) = ρ Sat 

ρ2 + ϵ ≈ Sat 

ρ ,

Sat = min(˜ o, ρ ).

14 Archetype Capability profile Need profile High-capability / low-need Strong gap coverage Weak task-side value Low-capability / high-need Weak gap coverage Strong task-side value Balanced Moderate coverage Moderate value Specialist Strong on one key gap Task-dependent value Distractor Off-target coverage Task-dependent value 

Table B.1: Candidate archetypes used in the contrastive faithfulness benchmark. The benchmark is designed to reduce Scap saturation and diversify winner profiles. 

When the attention-weighted offer value reaches the cap, ˜o ≥ ρ, we have Sat = ρ, so Sneed ≈ 1.Since this is the only need, its contribution can dominate the need-side score allocation. Now suppose the need is linked to an offer r⋆

only through a weak semantic match. The matched offer value is 

˜o = X

> r

βrsr.

After perturbing the linked offer, 

sr⋆ ← 0, ˜o′ = X 

> r̸=r⋆

β′

> r

sr,

where the attention weights are recomputed. If substitute offers still satisfy the cap, 

˜o′ ≥ ρ, 

then 

Sat ′ = ρ, S′

> need

(v, T ) ≈ Sneed (v, T ), ∆( f ) ≈ 0.

Thus a factor can receive high contribution share under the current decomposition while having weak single-factor perturbation effect. This is the bound-ary tested by the Failure Case in Table 2. 

Stochastic baseline stability. The multi-seed analysis in Section 4.4 repeats only the random and shuffled factor sampling. The task set and can-didate profiles are fixed. Across five seeds on the Contrast Benchmark, the main stochastic metrics remain stable: 

RDrop = 0 .1673 ± 0.0131 ,

RFlip = 0 .6800 ± 0.0748 ,

ORat = 1 .0000 .

This confirms that the oracle-level agreement does not depend on a favorable random-factor draw. 

B.5 Computational Resources 

Evaluation runs issued approximately 480 API calls to openai/gpt-4.1 and openai/gpt-4o , consum-ing an estimated 480 000 tokens and incurring a cost of roughly $1.20–$1.60 at list pricing, with a wall-clock runtime of 40–60 minutes per run exe-cuted sequentially. 15 ID Title Domain Required Skills 

T01 Design Recommendation API Ml Platform ml systems, python, evaluation, paper writing, bayesian modeling 

T02 Launch RAG Evaluation Dashboard Industry bayesian modeling, recommender systems, communica-tion 

T03 Create ML Data Pipeline Industry frontend, bayesian modeling, python 

T04 Prototype Hiring Assistant Analytics backend, recommender systems, communication, statistics 

T05 Improve Matching Quality Monitor Research bayesian modeling, backend, evaluation, frontend 

T06 Ship Research Collaboration Portal Industry recommender systems, bayesian modeling, product design, paper writing 

T07 Develop Demand Forecasting Workflow Matching data analysis, communication, frontend, statistics, paper writing 

T08 Build Knowledge Graph Explorer Analytics statistics, bayesian modeling, ml systems 

T09 Optimize Retrieval Stack Industry recommender systems, data analysis, python 

T10 Create Project Risk Scorer Ml Platform communication, evaluation, paper writing, recommender systems 

T11 Develop User Segmentation Toolkit Ml Platform evaluation, data analysis, ml systems, recommender sys-tems 

T12 Deploy Online Learning Service Industry backend, bayesian modeling, paper writing 

T13 Design Task Allocation Engine Matching communication, product design, recommender systems, bayesian modeling, distributed systems 

T14 Implement Experiment Tracking UI Ml Platform python, data engineering, frontend 

T15 Build Collaboration Outcome Predictor Research frontend, backend, bayesian modeling 

T16 Create Portfolio Ranking Service Industry backend, paper writing, data engineering, python, frontend 

T17 Prototype Industry Search Matching backend, data analysis, statistics 

T18 Develop Causal Analysis Notebook Analytics paper writing, data analysis, communication, evaluation, python 

T19 Ship Candidate Vetting Tool Research data analysis, communication, evaluation, distributed sys-tems 

T20 Build Bayesian Churn Model Matching evaluation, communication, paper writing, statistics, project management 

Table B.2: Overview of the 20 benchmark tasks. Each task is drawn from a distinct initiative domain; required skills are the competencies that candidates must cover. 

Method First Opt. ↓ ρmode ↑

Uniform priors (σinit = 0 .25 )UCB + Scap Greedy 11 .0 ± 5.9 0.896 ± 0.063 

Scap Greedy 1.0 ± 0.0 0.982 ± 0.021 

Random 17 .6 ± 4.7 0.901 ± 0.053 

Tiered priors (tier-stratified μinit , σ init )UCB + Scap Greedy 16 .6 ± 9.3 0.952 ± 0.029 

Scap Greedy 9.1 ± 10 .5 0.975 ± 0.033 

Random 17 .6 ± 4.7 0.901 ± 0.053 

Table B.3: Effect of prior type on matching quality and efficiency over 20 tasks (20 candidates each, Nmax =25 rounds, no noise). Uniform priors : all candidates initialised with σinit = 0 .25 . Tiered priors : candidates initialised with tier-stratified (μinit , σ init ) derived from ground-truth capability tiers. Values are mean ± std across 20 tasks. ↓ lower is better; ↑ higher is better. 

16 Dimension Metric AgenticPay PeopleJoin COWEAVER (ours) 

Quality ↑

ρmode 0.941 ± 0.066 0.966 ± 0.042 0.977 ± 0.046 

ρlast 0.941 ± 0.066 0.966 ± 0.042 0.989 ± 0.022 

Hit Rate 0.250 ± 0.444 0.333 ± 0.471 0.750 ± 0.444 

Efficiency ↓

First Opt. (rounds) 20 .0 ± 0.0 8.38 ± 2.32 4.4 ± 7.2

Consensus (rounds) 20 .0 ± 0.0 5.10 ± 0.60 6.5 ± 4.3

Rounds to ρ ≥ 0.95 20 .0 ± 0.0 5.14 ± 0.60 1.61 ± 1.20 

Rounds to ρ ≥ 0.99 20 .0 ± 0.0 5.21 ± 0.66 2.06 ± 1.73 

Table B.4: Benchmark results comparing CoWeaver, PeopleJoin-Reactive, and AgenticPay. Quality metrics (higher is better) and efficiency metrics (lower is better) are reported as mean ± std. PeopleJoin, AgenticPay and CoWeaver are evaluated using the 20-task protocol. For rounds-to-threshold metrics, parentheses indicate the number of task trajectories that reached the corresponding threshold. The best result for each metric is shown in bold. CoWeaver achieves the highest matching quality and reaches high-quality candidates in the fewest rounds, while PeopleJoin exhibits faster repeated-selection consensus. 

Candidate \ Requester Cooperative Competitive Analytical Agreeable Strategic Cooperative 0.57 0.46 0.87 0.98 0.56 Competitive 0.98 0.00 0.99 0.81 1.00 Analytical 0.66 0.65 0.97 0.47 0.65 Agreeable 0.91 0.81 0.91 0.81 0.03 Strategic 0.90 0.86 0.86 0.92 0.65 

Table B.5: Normalized AgenticPay compatibility matrix used as held-out ground truth for personality evaluation of LLM dreaming and Greedy. 

Task Requester TKC Dream Score ∆

Greedy Dreaming Greedy Dreaming TKC Dream T01 Cooperative 0.632 0.702 0.624 0.733 +0 .071 +0 .109 

T04 Competitive 0.924 0.988 0.590 0.635 +0 .064 +0 .045 

T08 Analytical 0.654 0.695 0.595 0.592 +0 .042 −0.003 

T09 Agreeable 0.879 0.583 0.704 0.735 −0.296 +0 .031 

T17 Strategic 0.890 0.802 0.598 0.641 −0.088 +0 .043 

Table B.6: Breakdown for one representative task per requester personality (5 representatives from the full 25-task set), plus the mean over all 25 tasks. TKC is the held-out ground truth; Dream Score is the LLM judge’s self-rating. 

Setting Value 

Task suite 20 tasks Candidate pool 20 candidates for RQ1/RQ2; 3 candi-dates for RQ4 Online-selection budget 25 rounds Dreaming budget 30 rounds Consensus criterion K = 3 consecutive selections Evaluation weights θ = [0 .4, −0.1] 

Capability observations Noise-free oracle observations unless otherwise stated Uniform prior uncertainty σinit = 0 .25 

LLM backend GPT-4o Faithfulness protocol Deterministic MapScore; exploration disabled; 5 seeds 

AgenticPay hyperparameters 

Discount factor γ 0.99 

Deal success reward D 30 .0

Deal quality reward W 55 .0

Round efficiency reward E 15 .0

Table B.7: Reproducibility settings used in the evaluation. 

17 Figure B.1: Compare C OWEAVER ’s matching efficiency with AgenticPay 

Figure B.2: Compare C OWEAVER ’s matching quality with AgenticPay 

18 Figure B.3: The Agreeable–Strategic trap. The dialogue features no impasses, mutual acknowledgment, and explicit agreement on terms—surface features that the LLM judge reads as compatibility ( Ssim = 0 .74 , good_match ). AgenticPay’s outcome-grounded GlobalScore, however, evaluates the fairness of the final allocation: U receives only 40 points while V receives 60 points, classifying the deal as exploitation of the Agreeable seeker. The Agreeable ×Strategic cell scores normalized C∗ = 0 .03 . The 0.71 gap is structural: the LLM judge has no mechanism to differentiate between “reached agreement” and “reached fair agreement”. 

19 81% 

> 19%
> Undergraduate
> Master's student

(a) Academic role 75%  

> 12%
> 12%
> 1-3 years
> < 1 year
> 3-5 years

(b) Years in current role 

Figure C.1: Survey respondent profile. (a) Academic role and (b) years in current role. The sample is domi-nated by early-career researchers: 13 of 16 respondents are undergraduates, and 12 of 16 report 1–3 years in their current role. 

C User Survey Motivation Evidence 

This appendix summarizes the HuMAS academic collaboration-agent survey ( n = 16 ) used to mo-tivate the collaboration-matching problem studied in the main paper. The survey is not used as an evaluation benchmark for C OWEAVER . Instead, it provides lightweight evidence for three assump-tions behind our problem formulation: the target users include early-career researchers with limited collaboration networks, useful collaborators are often complementary rather than similar, and re-searchers want proactive help in finding people or resources when bottlenecks arise. Figure C.1 characterizes the respondent popu-lation. The sample is concentrated among early-career researchers: 13 of 16 respondents are under-graduates, and 12 of 16 report 1–3 years in their current role. This profile is important for the moti-vation because early-career researchers often have weaker informal networks for discovering collabo-rators, mentors, or domain experts. For this popula-tion, a collaboration agent should not only answer questions after a user names a helper; it should help surface plausible collaborators when the user can only describe a task, bottleneck, or missing capability. Figure C.2 supports our use of capability com-plementarity as a central matching signal. When asked about their most important collaborator, 13 of 16 respondents described the expertise relation-ship as partially or highly complementary, while only 3 described it as highly overlapping. The same respondents reported heterogeneous research chal-lenges, including theoretical bottlenecks, insuffi-cient literature review, time management, technical implementation, and falling behind the state of the 62% 

> 19%
> 19%
> Partially complementary
> Highly overlapping
> Highly complementary

(a) Expertise relationship 0 2 4 6

> Number of respondents
> Theoretical bottleneck
> Insufficient literature
> review
> Time management
> Technical implementation
> Falling behind SOTA
> 4
> 4
> 4
> 3
> 1

(b) Main research challenge 

Figure C.2: Collaboration patterns and research chal-lenges. (a) Respondents describe their key collaborators as largely complementary: 13 of 16 report a partially or highly complementary expertise relationship. (b) Re-ported research challenges span theory, literature review, time management, implementation, and tracking state of the art. 44% 

> 31%
> 25%
> Seek external help
> Literature / forum search
> Work through independently

(a) First reaction to bottleneck 0 2 4 6

> Number of respondents
> Collaboration suggestion
> (recommend relevant
> teammate)
> Resource recommendation
> (scripts / tools)
> Efficiency optimization
> (suggest better
> implementation)
> Risk warning (deadline /
> progress alert)
> 5
> 5
> 4
> 2

(b) Desired AI assistance 

Figure C.3: Bottleneck responses and desired AI as-sistance. (a) Seven of 16 respondents report seeking external help from a mentor or expert as their first reac-tion to a bottleneck. (b) Collaboration suggestions and resource recommendations are the two most frequent desired forms of proactive AI assistance. 

art. These responses suggest that a useful matching system should connect a task to actors who cover the specific missing capability, rather than simply retrieve researchers or agents with similar profiles. Figure C.3 further motivates proactive collabora-tion support. When encountering a bottleneck, 7 of 16 respondents reported that their first reaction is to seek external help from a mentor or expert. For desired AI assistance, collaboration suggestions and resource recommendations were the two most frequent choices, with 5 respondents selecting each. This pattern motivates the upstream matching role of C OWEAVER : before downstream coordination or task execution can happen, the system must de-cide which human, proxy agent, service agent, or reusable skill is worth connecting to the requester. Because the survey is small and skewed toward early-career respondents, we treat it as motivation rather than generalizable user-study evidence. 20