Title: Clustered Edge Intelligence: Beyond Just Convergence of Edge Computing and AI

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.20937v1

Published Time: Fri, 24 Jul 2026 00:30:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Clustered Edge Intelligence: Beyond Just Convergence of Edge Computing and AI 

Chinmaya Kumar Dehury a, Boris Sedlak b, Alaa Saleh c, Ilir Murturi d, Lauri Lovén e, Satish Narayana Srirama f,Praveen Kumar Donta g, ∗

> aDepartment of PComputer Science, IISER Berhampur, Odisha, India
> bDistributed Systems Group, TU Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria.
> cDepartment of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, 00100 Helsinki, Finland
> dDepartment of Mechatronics, University of Prishtina, Prishtina 10000, Kosova.
> eCenter for Applied Computing, University of Oulu, 90100 Oulu, Finland
> fSchool of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Hyderabad, India.
> gDepartment of Computer and Systems Sciences, Stockholm University, 164 25 Stockholm, Sweden.

Abstract 

We are moving from an information age to the age of intelligence. A decade, or possibly less than that, data will not be the gold anymore rather the derived intelligence out of the data and the information we posses from the edge of the network. Existing Edge Intelligence research focuses mainly on two directions: using AI for edge resource management and deploying lightweight AI models on edge devices. However, existing edge-computing research lacks an intelligence-centric framework in which derived intelligence is treated as a first-class, independently manageable entity that can be described, discovered, observed, shared, reused, and dynamically clustered across heterogeneous edge devices and applications. To address these research gaps, we introduced Clustered Edge Intelligence (CEI), a visionary intelligence-centric approach. The aim of CEI is to make intelligence a shareable and reusable first-class entity that can be independently represented, discovered, observed, exchanged, and managed across the distributed edge–cloud continuum. We present a three-layer CEI architecture and examine enabling technologies and research dimensions, including intelligence inventories, semantic knowledge representation, communication, discoverability, observability, lifecycle automation, clustering mechanisms, marketplaces, interoperability, and standardization. 

Keywords: Clustered Edge Intelligence, intelligence-centric clustering, edge agent, Edge Computing, AI 

1. Introduction 

We are transitioning from the Information Age to the Age of Intelligence, where the saying “data is the new gold” will soon be a thing of the past. The spotlight will shift from merely managing and analyzing vast quantities of data—say zettabytes to exabytes to yottabytes—to man-aging and utilizing the derived intelligence. The process of transforming raw data into actionable intelligence involves a series of steps where data is contextualized into informa-tion, understood as knowledge, and ultimately applied to make informed decisions. 

Knowledge & Intelligence. In the domain of computer sci-ence, knowledge refers to the information, facts, or un-derstanding of the surrounding environment, including all tangible and intangible entities that we have acquired through a set of dedicated resource-constraint devices and networks [1]. On the other hand, intelligence encompasses the cog-nitive abilities, reasoning, and learning capacity that make use of the existing knowledge [2]. Based on the Merriam-Webster 1 dictionary, intelligence is the ability to learn or 

> ∗Corresponding author
> 1https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/intelligence

understand or to deal with new or trying situations . In computer science, since decades a portion of the research revolving around embedding high-degree of intelligence onto the servers with high-end resource configuration. However, the research is slowly moving towards embedding certain level of intelligence to resource-constraints devices, e.g. the edge devices. In the context of edge infrastructure, consisting of bil-lions of edge devices, lets take an example and understand the transformation of data into intelligence, as shown in Figure 1. In this example, data is first collected from two sensors, say numerical value 45 from a temperature sensor and 97 from a PM2.5 sensor. Let’s assume that both sensors are connected to one edge device. These raw data points, however, are devoid of context until they are given meaning, transforming them into information. For instance, the value 45 is contextualized as 45 ◦C temp, and 

97 is understood as 97 μg/m3 PM2.5, providing a clear un-derstanding of what these numbers represent in the real world. This information is then processed further, where the device recognizes or becomes aware of the current en-vironmental conditions, thus converting this information into knowledge. Knowledge in this context means that a system is not only aware of the current temperature and arXiv:2607.20937v1 [cs.AI] 23 Jul 2026 Intelligence Knowledge Information Data 

45 

97 

> temp
> PM2.5
> Aware of current temp
> Aware of current PM2.5 value
> Give a meaning Give a meaning
> Realization of having information Realization of having information
> Categorize
> Categorize
> Very cold
> Cold
> ...
> Very hot
> Very good
> good
> ...
> worse air quality
> Take action
> Take action
> Use of knowledge Use of knowledge
> Temp sensor PM2.5 sensor
> Edge Device Figure 1: The transformation from Data to Intelligence: an example in Edge device

air quality levels but also understands their significance. Finally, this knowledge is used to categorize the environ-mental conditions into states such as Very Hot or Good air quality. Based on environmental conditions, the edge device may take appropriate action. For instance, in a smart home scenario, the edge device may directly communicate with the air purifier to turn on when the air quality is low. It may also directly instruct the air conditioning system to cool the environment. This final stage, where the system uses its knowledge to make decisions and act, represents the transformation of knowledge into intelligence. This demonstrates a clear distinction between knowledge and intelligence within the context of an edge infrastructure. Can we refer intelligence available at the edge of the net-work as “Edge Intelligence” ? More onto this is discussed in Section 2. 

Cohesion & Coherence . In general, the term Cohesion 

can be defined as binding different elements/components to create a singular unit [3]. In the context of edge intelli-gence, Cohesion would refer to the integration and binding of intelligence available at different types of edge devices [4]. On the other hand, the term Coherence can be de-fined as establishing a logical connection between diverse elements/components. In the context of edge intelligence, coherence can be seen as the connectedness/consistency that exists among intelligence possessed by different edge devices. For instance, a logical connection can be estab-lished between different sensors in the smart home sce-nario. The luminosity sensor and the proximity sensor are logically connected to the smart bulb. The level of CO2 is logically connected with traffic congestion and noise level. Higher noise levels on the road might indicate a higher value of CO2, and in a similar way, a higher value of CO2 may indicate higher noise pollution and more traffic con-gestion [5, 6]. This shows a coherence or a logical rela-tionship among different types of intelligence available at the edge of the network. In a very large-scale of edge in-frastructure, where the number of edge devices may scale beyond few millions or billions, management of those in-telligence is a cumbersome task. The current research is mostly progressing through clus-tering resource-constraint IoT devices [7], where clusters are formed mainly based on the geographic proximity, com-munication distance, sensing coverage, or proximity to an edge server [8, 9, 10]. Such clusters are mainly responsi-ble for performing a set of tasks with a single objective to achieve. This approach itself becoming a hurdle for im-plementing the edge intelligence that may involves a large number of IoT devices deployed in different geographical locations or of different types. For instance, with a con-ventional location-based clustering approach [11], it may not be possible to form a cluster of sensors that are avail-able in the city buses. We may face the similar difficulties in case of clustering the sensors deployed in different solar panels in a smart city. To address the above limitations, this paper introduces Clustered Edge Intelligence (CEI), an intelligence-centric vision where intelligence is considered as a first-class en-tity for its efficient management across distributed com-puting continuum. The major contributions of this paper are summarized as follows. 

• To address the above limitations, this paper intro-duces Clustered Edge Intelligence (CEI), an intelligence-centric vision where intelliegnce is considered as a first-class entity for its efficient management across distributed computing continuum. 

• We revisited the meaning of Edge Intelligence and classify it into three forms: AI for edge resource man-agement, AI deployed at the edge, and intelligence available at the edge (our primary focus). 

• CEI as a new paradigm is introduced where intelli-gence can be represented, discovered, observed, shared, reused, and clustered across heterogeneous edge de-vices. Following this, 2• we compared device-centric and intelligence-centric clustering and show how CEI decouples intelligence from the underlying hardware. 

• A three-layer CEI architecture is proposed consisting of edge devices, edge controllers, and cloud environ-ments. 

• We identified key baseline technologies required for design and implementation of CEI, including abstrac-tion, knowledge graphs, communication, discover-ability, observability, clustering, and lifecycle-support mechanisms. 

• Finally, we discussed major research dimensions and representative use cases to guide future research on intelligence-centric edge systems. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In addition, for a quick reference, the overall outline of the manuscript is presented in Figure 2. Section 2 dis-cusses the different forms of Edge Intelligence, including AI for edge resource management, AI deployed at the edge, and intelligence available at the edge. Section 3 in-troduces the concept of Clustered Edge Intelligence, ex-plains the motivation behind clustering intelligence, and compares device-centric and intelligence-centric clustering mechanisms. Section 4 presents the proposed CEI archi-tecture, including the edge device layer, edge controller layer, cloud environment layer, and key system characteris-tics. Section 5 discusses the baseline technologies required to realize CEI, such as abstraction, knowledge graphs, communication mechanisms, discoverability, observability, clustering mechanisms, and other supporting technologies. Section 6 highlights the major research dimensions, includ-ing intelligence marketplaces, intelligence lifecycle automa-tion, clustering mechanisms, the use of language models, interoperability, and standardization. Section 7 presents representative use cases of CEI in Industry 4.0, smart city and traffic management, smart agriculture, and other ap-plication domains. Section 8 provides the survey of exist-ing research works. Finally, Section 9 concludes the paper and outlines future research directions. Table 1 provides the list of frequently used acronyms in this article. 

2. Different forms of “Edge Intelligence” 

The term “Edge Intelligence (EI)” may have different meaning in different context and situations [12]. This can be referred to the design and deployment of AI al-gorithm for management of the edge computing, storage and network resources [13]. This definition is referred to as 1st Form (acronym EI-1F) in this article and used hence-forth. On the other hand, in recent days the term “Edge Intelligence (EI)” is also refers to the minimalist version of an AI model (e.g. MobileNetV2 [14], SqueezeNet [15],                                   

> Table 1: List of acronyms used within this paper.
> Acronym Description
> EI Edge Intelligence EI-1F Edge Intelligence – First Form (AI for Edge Re-source Management) EI-2F Edge Intelligence – Second Form (AI at the Edge Infrastructure) EI-3F Edge Intelligence –Third Form (Intelligence Available at the Edge) ERM Edge Resource Management EC Edge Computing CEI Clustered Edge Intelligence EA Edge Agent DCC Device-Centric Clustering ICC Intelligence-Centric Clustering FL Federated Learning RL Reinforcement Learning IoT Internet of Things API Application Programming Interface REST Representational State Transfer Pub-Sub Publish–Subscribe Communication Model MQTT Message Queuing Telemetry Transport HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol IP intelligence provider HAL Hardware Abstraction Layer MPU Microprocessor Unit EIM Edge Intelligence Marketplace EIP Edge Intelligence Producer ICC Intelligence Cluster DD Device Discovery D2D Device-to-Device SD Service Discovery SR Service Registry

Edge Tensor Processing Unit (EdgeTPU)-optimized mod-els, YOLOv5-Nano 2, ShuffleNet [16], etc) deployed at the edge of the network [17], as shown in Figure 3. In this article, this definition is referred to as 2nd Form (acronym EI-2F) and used henceforth. However, in this research, it is believed that the term EI may also refereed to the in-telligence available at the edge of the network, as shown in Figure 3, considered as 3rd Form (acronym EI-3F) and used henceforth. Such intelligence can be obtained using any AI, non-AI algorithms or any custom script. This can be realized in the context of smart city, supply chain, smart agriculture, and industry 4.0 real-world scenarios [18]. Detailed explanation of all possible forms of EI and their comparisons are provided below. 

2.1. EI-1F: AI for edge resource management 

Unlike the conventional approach of manual and brute-force approach of managing the edge resource manage-ment, the recent advancement of AI/ML is significantly integrated for the same purpose. AI is used in handling wide-range of tasks related to edge resource management, including network allocation [19], energy-aware scheduling [20], task migration [21], compute allocation [22], upload scheduling and many more. 

> 2https://docs.ultralytics.com/models/yolov5

3CEI Manuscript Organisation 1. Introduction          

> 2. Different forms of “Edge Intelligence”
> 2.1. EI-1F: AI for edge resource management
> 2.2. EI-2F: AI at edge infrastructure
> 2.3. EI-3F: Intelligence available at edge
> 2.4. Comparision
> 3. Clustered Edge Intelligence
> 3.1. Why “Clustered”?
> 3.2. An example of CEI
> 3.3. Device- vs Intelligence-centric clustering mechanism
> 3.3.1. Device-centric clustering Approach
> 3.3.2. Intelligence-centric clustering Approach
> 3.3.3. Comparision
> 4. CEI Architecture
> 4.3. Cloud Environment layer
> 4.1. Edge device layer
> 4.2. Edge controller layer
> 4.4. Characteristic of CEI
> 5. Baseline Technologies
> 5.1. Abstraction
> 5.3. Communication
> 5.2. Knowledge Graph
> 5.3.1. REST
> 5.7. Other baseline technologies
> 5.3.3. 5G/6G and LoRaWAN
> 5.3.2. Pub-Sub
> 5.4. Discoverability
> 5.4.3. Network Discovery
> 5.4.2. Device Discovery
> 5.4.1. Service Discovery
> 5.6. Clustering mechanisms
> 6. Research Dimensions
> 6.1. Intelligence marketplace
> 6.2. Intelligence discoverability & observability
> 6.4. Clustering mechanism
> 6.3. Intelligence lifecycle automation
> 6.6. Interoperability and Standardization
> 6.5. Use of language models
> 7. Use cases
> 7.1. Industry 4.0
> 7.2. Smart City & Traffic Management System
> 7.3. Smart Agricultural
> 7.4. Other use cases
> 9. Conclusions and Future Works
> 5.5.
> Observability
> 8. Literature Survey
> 8.1. Paradigms and Taxonomy
> 8.2. Semantic Representation & Abstraction
> 8.3. From Device-Centric to Clustering-Centric

Figure 2: Organization of the manuscript 

For example, edge devices such as roadside CCTV an-alytics units or Jetson-based video processors often un-dergo thermal stress during continuous high-rate infer-ence [23]. A TinyML-based regression model can be em-bedded locally to predict short-term thermal load (e.g., 30–60 seconds ahead) based on current CPU/GPU utiliza-tion, ambient temperature, and inference rate. When the predicted temperature exceeds a critical threshold (e.g., 75 °C), the system can autonomously downscale compu-tation by lowering Frames Per Second (FPS), switching to a lighter AI model [24], or reducing hardware clock speeds [25]. Another example can be seen in network band-width allocation [19]. Smart traffic poles frequently exe-cute multiple competing tasks-such as license plate recog-nition, pedestrian detection, and environmental sensing-over bandwidth-limited 4G/5G uplinks. A lightweight re-inforcement learning (RL) agent deployed within the pole can dynamically prioritize bandwidth allocation based on contextual demand [26, 27]. For example, under high traf-fic load, more bandwidth is allocated to CCTV analytics. Further, in remote isolated areas, solar-powered IoT nodes must preserve energy while performing the task as-signed to it. A TinyLSTM (Tiny Long Short-Term Mem-ory) model 3 can predict future battery levels and solar in-put over the upcoming operational cycle. Based on these predictions, the node autonomously reduces sensor sam-pling frequency, disables non-critical sensing modules, or defers communication-intensive tasks when low-energy con-ditions are forecasted [28]. Through predictive analytics, AI can forecast edge and cloud resource failures, ensuring timely maintenance and reducing downtimes. Additionally, AI-driven security pro-tocols can detect and mitigate potential threats, enhancing the robustness of the edge network. Furthermore, AI facil-itates dynamic resource allocation, optimizing bandwidth and storage based on real-time data processing needs. In 

> 3

https://github.com/cpllab/tinylstm 

essence, the integration of AI into edge-cloud infrastruc-ture management promises enhanced efficiency, security, and adaptability. Design of AI for edge device manage-ment is also referred to as the 1st form of EI in this arti-cle. 

2.2. EI-2F: AI at edge infrastructure 

AI at the edge infrastructure, refers to the deployment of AI algorithms, especially the tiny version of AI, and minimalist models on the resource-constraint edge devices, close to the source of data, rather than in a centralized cloud-based system. This approach offers several advan-tages, including real-time processing, efficiency, speed, and enable autonomy. Lightweight AI models are deployed at the edge in a wide range of real-world applications. Al-banese et al. [29] highlighted the potential of edge AI in automating pest detection within fruit orchards, allowing for real-time monitoring and timely interventions. This enhances the overall efficiency of smart agriculture prac-tices. Edge intelligence and deep learning are also applied in autonomous navigation in vineyards by Aghi et al. [30]. The authors present a novel control mechanism that uses a custom-trained segmentation network and a low-range RGB-D camera to produce smooth trajectories and stable control in various vineyard scenarios. Radanliev et al. in [31] discuss the integration of AI and edge computing in supply chains, emphasizing the mitigation of cyber risks, offering predictive cyber risk analytics with real-time in-telligence from IoT networks at the edge. Recently Large Language Models (LLMs) are also being deployed on these edge devices providing intelligence for performing various natural language processing (NLP) tasks such as trans-lation, question answering, text summarization, and gen-erating clinical summaries from multimodal data such as text, sensor data, images and audio [32]. This version of EI, also referred to as the 2nd form of EI , in this article. 4Edge Device -1             

> Input AI model
> Edge Device -2
> Input AI model
> Edge Device - 3 Input Custom script
> Edge Device -
> Input if-else rule
> ...
> Edge Device - 4
> Input non-AI algorithm
> Edge Gateway
> Edge Gateway
> Edge Gateway
> Cloud environment
> EI-3F: Intelligence Available at Edge of the network
> EI-2F: AI at Edge
> AI for ERM
> * AI for ERM :AI for Edge Resource Management * EI-1F : 1st Form of EI ; EI-2F : 2nd Form of EI ; EI-3F : 3rd Form of EI
> AI for ERM
> AI for ERM
> AI for ERM
> AI for ERM
> Output (Predicted)
> Output (Predicted)
> Output
> Output
> Output
> EI-1F: AI for edge
> ... Figure 3: Different forms of Edge Intelligence.

2.3. EI-3F: Intelligence available at edge 

However, unlike the above-mentioned meanings of “edge intelligence”, it can also be referred to as the “ intelligence available at the edge of the network ”, also known as 3rd form of EI . Some of the examples include intelligence re-lated to energy production by Photovoltaic panels deployed atop city buses, intelligence related to trees, wildlife, and animals in the forest, and intelligence connected to soil conditions in the smart agriculture context. In the con-text of smart traffic, the camera not only captures edge knowledge (e.g. number of vehicles, their speed, traffic conditions, etc.) but also processes that knowledge on-the-spot to produce and share those intelligence (e.g. if a traffic is highly congested, if a city bus is delayed, if a vehicle is going beyond speed limit in a specific area, etc.) among other edge devices. Edge intelligence helps smarter decision making and can be used to enable predictive ana-lytics and smarter services. In this article, our focus is to explore this version of EI, including the novelty, challenges, potential solutions, and baseline technologies or concepts. More on this is discussed on the later sections. 

2.4. Comparison of three forms 

Table 2 provides a comparative analysis of the three forms of Edge Intelligence (EI-1F, EI-2F, and EI-3F), tak-ing some of the key parameters into account, such as host-ing environment, purpose, challenges, development focus, deployment scenarios, complexity, interdependency, scala-bility, and security impact. Unlike EI-1F and EI-2F, the primary goal of EI-3F (Intelligence available at Edge) is to obtain and share in-telligence across devices to enable collaborative decision-making. However, achieving this goal introduces several challenges, including intelligence synchronization, distributed learning, intelligence discoverability & observability, and maintaining consistency across devices. The deployment scenarios of EI-3F are particularly suited for collaborative learning, where intelligence sharing among edge devices can mutually benefit multiple systems. A key example includes interconnected vehicles in a fleet, where each ve-hicle shares its intelligence to enhance navigation, safety, and traffic management in real-time [33]. 

3. Clustered Edge Intelligence: Beyond EC and AI convergence 

Edge Intelligence (EI) in general refers to the conver-gence of edge computing and artificial intelligence [34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39], be it AI for edge or AI on edge . In con-ventional EI, the AI/ML algorithms are deployed on edge computing node, which complement its counterpart cloud deployment to provide realtime decision-making and pre-dictive analytics service, as also discussed in Section 2.1 and 2.2. For example in a modern traffic control system, the identification and blurring of a person’s face can be done at the edge using light-weight AI algorithms [40]. One of the major advantages of EI is to perform AI/ML tasks and data analysis locally on the device, instead of sending all data to a central server, which can reduce la-tency, maintain privacy, and reduce network bandwidth consumption. Some of the applications of conventional EI includes: 

• Smart Home: The devices such as smart speakers, 5Table 2: Comparison of different forms of Edge Intelligence                                                                 

> Parameter EI-1F: AI for ERM EI-2F: AI@Edge EI-3F: Intelligence available at Edge
> Hosting envi-ronment Edge Device, edge-cloud contin-uum, network devices Edge device Edge Device, edge-cloud continuum, net-work devices Purpose Edge computing and network re-source management processing raw data available at edge Obtaining & sharing intelligence, collbora-tive decision-making Challenges Making AI model tiny, limited com-puting resource, security, privacy & Trust in AI-driven decisions Limited computational resources, model optimization & compression, lack of standardization, deployment complexity, hardware heterogeneity Intelligence synchronization, distributed learning, intelligence discoverability, in-telligence observability, consistency across devices Development focus - system optimization - edge infras-tructure management - edge secu-rity model design, pruning, quantiza-tion, and other techniques to make AI models compact - distributed learning - peer-to-peer intel-ligence exchange - collaborative learning. Deployment scenario This is required when (a)- dynamic edge resource allocation leads to performance gains (b)- dynamically securing edge device where immediate action is required based on data - e.g. autonomous vehicles, health monitoring, or in-dustrial automation. - suitable for collaborative learning - when one edge device can be benifited from oth-ers - e.g. interconnected vehicles in a fleet Complexity Complex because of device and re-source heterogenity Complexity lies in making the model compact without compro-mising accuracy complexity lies in - communication proto-cols - distributed system - heterogeneous network Scalability Not very challenging as the AI needs to manage single edge de-vice’s resources not very challenging, as the AI models only concern about data generated by that device only very challenging Security im-pact The entire edge infrastructure users’ applications users’ applications

thermostats, and security cameras can use EI to an-alyze smart home sensor data and make decisions locally, such as adjusting temperature and indoor lu-minosity, notifying wastage of electricity or alerting homeowner the potential security threats, etc [41]. 

• Industry 4.0: EI can be used in modern manufactur-ing industries to analyze robot and machinery sensor data to detect anomalies, predict failure and mainte-nance needs, optimize production pipeline, etc [42]. 

• Smart Traffic and Vehicular network: With EI a wide range of traffic management tasks can be per-formed, including CCTV footage analysis, predict traffic flow, congestion, and accidents [43]. With EI vehicles can exchange information about road condi-tions and traffic. In autonomous driving, EI enable sensors data analysis in real-time manner, make deci-sions about steering, braking, and acceleration. This can play an important role in improving the safety and reliability of autonomous driving [44]. 

• Retail: EI allows the retailer to analyze data from sensors and cameras to implement smart shelves, track customer behavior, optimize checkout process, detect fraud, and improve inventory management. Under the current approach, edge devices remain highly dependent on a central system, with limited or negligi-ble opportunities to share their learning directly with peer edge devices. For instance, in Federated Learning (FL), multiple edge devices contribute to improving and updat-ing a central machine-learning model while keeping their training data locally [45, 46]. This approach helps achieve several important objectives, including reduced latency, improved reliability and scalability, enhanced privacy and security, lower network bandwidth consumption, reduced service cost, and improved service quality. However, it does not fully address the research question of how edge devices with similar characteristics, capabilities, or config-urations can directly share their learning or derived intel-ligence without relying on a central system. Conventional Edge Intelligence research therefore provides limited sup-port for peer-level collaboration, transfer of learning and knowledge, and collaborative reasoning. To address this gap, we revisit the concept of Edge Intelligence from a dif-ferent perspective and interpret it as “Intelligence Avail-able at the Edge”, the 3rd form of EI (EI-3F), as briefed in Section 2.3. In EI-3F, intelligence is treated as a first-class entity that can be uniquely identified, discovered, observed, shared, and reused. Edge agents (EAs) deployed on edge devices are responsible for deriving intelligence from locally avail-able data and knowledge. An edge agent is an autonomous software entity operating on an edge device that processes local data and knowledge, derives and publishes intelli-gence, discovers and consumes external intelligence, and collaborates with other edge agents to support context-aware decision-making. An edge agent consists of three primary components: an AI model or algorithm, metadata, and business logic. The metadata may describe the type of data processed, lo-cation, data-generation frequency, communication require-ments, and other contextual properties. The business logic defines how the data is used, how the agent communi-cates with other edge agents, and how contextual aware-ness is incorporated into decision-making. In conventional approaches, these components are often hard-coded and tightly coupled with the underlying host device. In the proposed approach, the edge agent encapsulates these com-6ponents and decouples them from the host device, thereby improving portability, reusability, and manageability. Edge agents are also responsible for producing intelligence and managing its lifecycle, including publication, update, mon-itoring, and retirement. Multiple edge agents may be co-located on the same edge device; however, a single edge-agent instance is assumed to operate on one edge device at a given time [24]. This raises an important question: if intelligence is treated as a first-class entity, why is there still a need to cluster multiple intelligences? 

3.1. Why “Clustered”? 

Traditionally, intelligence is derived based on specific information, mostly in the cloud computing environment. For example, whether a road is congested or not is typ-ically determined in a cloud environment after receiving location information from multiple vehicles or analyzing video footage. These are classic examples where intelli-gence is derived from the same type of data. However, we believe that multiple types of information can be used to derive more reliable intelligence. For example, loca-tion data from vehicles, CCTV footage, and CO 2 levels in a specific road segment can be combined to more accu-rately and reliably determine traffic congestion. Extending this to a more practical scenario, we propose that multi-ple types of intelligence, produced by edge agents deployed on edge devices, can be semantically clustered together to generate more complex intelligence. The following sub-section provides a more concrete example to simplify the concept behind Clustered Edge Intelligence (CEI). 

3.2. Clustering Edge Intelligence : An Example 

Let’s explore the benefits of Clustered Edge Intelligence (CEI) with an example of a remote fire detection and alert system, as shown in Figure 4. In the conventional ap-proach, as in Figure 4(a), the setup relies solely on one type of edge sensor, combined with onboard data analytics, say CCTV camera sensor combined with on board footage an-alytics. Onboard footage analytics (which could be a tiny AI model or specialized computer-vision algorithm) con-tinuously captures the video footage from CCTV camera to detect visual indicators of fire within the view-point of the camera. If a fire is detected, the system immediately triggers an alert, notifying the relevant authorities or sys-tems to respond. This approach is straightforward but has limitations, primarily because it depends entirely on the visual detection of fire. As a result, it may be prone to false alarms or could miss fires that do not have clear vi-sual signs, such as those covered by obstacles or occurring in areas not covered by the camera. However, with the CEI approach (Figure 4(b)), the fire detection mechanism can be further enhanced by integrat-ing additional layers of intelligence and data validation before raising an alert. Instead of raising an alert immedi-ately upon detecting fire, the edge device can cross-check and validate the detection with external intelligence. This external intelligence may come from other edge devices. For instance, the EA deployed on Edge Device - 2 may provide environmental intelligence such as recent change in CO2 levels, temperature, and humidity. The EA on 

Edge Device - 3 may provide intelligence if there is any recent significant change in Air Quality. By comparing the footage-based fire detection with real-time external environmental intelligence, the agent on Edge Device -1 

can more accurately and reliably confirm whether a fire is actually occurring. Only after this validation process is complete the system raise an alert. This approach signifi-cantly reduces the likelihood of false alarms and ensures a more reliable response to potential fire hazards. Through the CEI (Clustered Edge Intelligence) approach, we can establish a cluster of related intelligence produced by various agents. As illustrated in Figure 4(c), this cluster integrates intelligence such as recent changes in CO2 lev-els, temperature, and humidity from Edge Device-2 , along with significant recent changes in air quality from Edge Device-3 . It’s important to note that these edge devices do not share raw data; instead, the deployed EAs share derived intelligence based on the data available to each respective device. This shared intelligence is collectively analyzed to assess the likelihood of a fire, enhancing the system’s ability to detect and respond to potential threats effectively. At this point, one might wonder how intelligence clus-tering is different or similar to the clustering of underlying edge devices. This also raises another question: why to form clusters based on the relativity of intelligence rather than the devices that provide it? We will address both questions in detail in the following subsection. 

3.3. Device- vs Intelligence-centric clustering mechanism 

In continuation to explore the concept of clustered edge intelligence and our previous work on clustered and cohe-sive edge intelligence [47], in this subsection, we compare two different clustering approaches: Device-centric cluster-ing and Intelligence-centric clustering approaches. Figure 5 presents a comparative analysis of two different cluster-ing approaches. 

3.3.1. Device-centric clustering (DCC) Approach: 

In device-centric clustering approach (Figure 5(a)), clus-ters of physical edge devices are formed based on their physical characteristics, proximity, or functional roles, rather than the specific intelligence they generate. Each cluster contains a group of devices that are managed by an edge controller, which communicates with a fog node connected to cloud computing resources. The edge controller main-tains a device inventory, mapping each device (e.g., D1,

D2) to the specific type of intelligence (e.g., i1, i2) it gen-erates. For instance, devices D1 and D2 generate intelli-gences i1 and i2, respectively. This approach organizes the devices into clusters without considering the specific type of intelligence they produce, instead of primarily focusing on the management of the devices themselves. 7New Approach           

> Edge Device-3
> Edge Device-2
> Traditional Approach
> Edge Device
> CCTV
> On-board Footage Analytics
> Detected Fire
> Raise Alert
> Edge Device-1
> CCTV
> On-board Footage Analytics
> Detected Fire
> Raise Alert
> Cross-check & validate with external intelligence
> Recent increase in CO2 value
> Recent increase in
> Temp value
> Recent significant change in Humidity
> Recent change in Air Quality (e.g. PM2.5)
> External
> Intelligence
> On-board Footage Analytics
> Recent increase in CO2 value
> Recent increase in
> Temp value
> Recent significant change in Humidity
> Recent change in Air Quality (e.g. PM2.5)
> Fire Dection Cluster
> (a) (b) (c)

Figure 4: Comparison between traditional and CEI-enabled fire-detection mechanisms (an example): (a) single-source detection, (b) intelligence-assisted validation, and (c) logical clustering of related intelligence for reliable fire detection. 

Each device within the cluster is usually identified by a unique identifier. The intelligence could either be stored directly in the inventory or queried from the device in real-time when needed. Accessing the intelligence in a device-centric clustering approach requires the user to have knowledge of specific device identifiers. This means that before any intelligence (such as “What is the percentage of changes in CO 2 value in last 10 mins in location X?”) can be accessed, the user must first ascertain whether the desired device is present within the network. The process begins with the user sending a query to the edge gateway, which serves as the management hub for the device clus-ter. The query typically asks whether a particular device is available in the inventory. If the device is present, the edge gateway retrieves the surrounding intelligence from that specific device. Further, in a traditional approach, the intelligence is computed/derived on-demand either on the source edge device or computed on the edge device where the request is generated. An important aspect of this approach is the tight cou-pling between devices and the intelligence they generate. This tight coupling means that the device-centric approach emphasizes the management and availability of physical devices. To access a particular piece of intelligence, it is crucial first to ensure that the device capable of providing that intelligence is available in the network. This process is repeated for all devices connected to the edge gateway, making the device the primary focus of the clustering and intelligence retrieval processes. It reflects a more hardware-oriented view of edge com-puting, where the infrastructure and devices themselves are central, and the intelligence they provide is secondary. This approach can be advantageous in scenarios where spe-cific devices are known to generate unique and critical in-telligence. The primary challenge with this approach is the risk of vendor lock-in. Different vendors may use dis-tinct data models to provide data or intelligence, leading to compatibility issues. Furthermore, if multiple devices offer the same type of intelligence, it becomes difficult to seamlessly substitute one device with another from a differ-ent vendor in case of failure or unavailability. This lack of interoperability can restrict the effective use of alternative devices, limiting flexibility and resilience in the system. 

3.3.2. Intelligence-centric clustering (ICC) Approach: 

On the contrary, as proposed in this research work, in the intelligence-centric clustering approach (Figure 5(b)), the fundamental difference is that the focus is not pri-marily on device management but on the management of intelligence available. There is a shift from focusing on the physical devices to prioritizing the intelligence they gen-erate. In this approach, the edge controller maintains an intelligence inventory, mapping each type of intelligence (e.g., i1, i2) to the corresponding devices that provide it. For example, intelligence i1 might be derived from device 

D1, while intelligence i2 could be generated by one or more number of devices from multiple devices such as D2, D3,and D4. In this approach, clusters (Cluster-1 and Cluster-2) are formed by grouping together intelligences rather than devices. It is to be noted that, the inventory may include intelligence for which there are currently no con-nected devices, highlighting the system’s flexibility and its decoupling of intelligence from specific hardware. When a user seeks to obtain certain environmental in-telligence (e.g., last 30 min average humidity on location A, Air quality ( P M 2.5 value) improved by X% in last 

24 hours , etc.), they send a query to the edge controller. The controller response process is streamlined: it checks its intelligence inventory to determine if the requested in-telligence is within its scope. If the intelligence is available, 8D1               

> i1
> D2
> i2
> D3
> i3 D4
> i2
> D5
> i2
> D6
> i1
> D8
> i3
> D9
> i3
> D7
> i2
> Edge Controller
> Edge Controller
> Fog Node
> Cluster - 1 Cluster - 2
> Device Inventory
> D6 -> i1
> D7 -> i2
> ...
> Device Inventory
> D1 -> i1
> D2 -> i2
> ...
> Cluster - 1
> i1 i2 i3
> D2 D1 D3 D4 D5
> Edge Controller
> Intelligence Inventory
> i1 -> D1
> i2 -> D2, D3, ...
> ...
> Edge Controller
> Intelligence Inventory
> i1 -> D6
> i2 -> D7
> ...
> Fog Node
> Cluster - 2
> D7
> i1 i2 i3
> D6 D8 D9
> Intelligence : i1, i2, i3 , .....
> Devices : D1, D2, D3, ..... Cloud Computing
> Cloud Computing
> (a) - Device-centric clustering approach (b) - Intelligence-centric clustering approach

Figure 5: A pictorial representation of (a) Device-centric clustering approach, and (b) intelligence-centric clustering approach. 

the controller queries the appropriate device and forwards the resulting data back to other edge devices or even the end-user. It is not required to have any knowledge of the specific devices providing the intelligence. The manage-ment of devices is kept abstract, meaning, details such as the device’s age, vendor, operating frequency, or other hardware-related characteristics are abstracted out from other edge devices or the end-user. This abstraction sim-plifies the user experience, allowing them to focus solely on the intelligence they need rather than the complications of the devices that produce it. Another important aspect of this approach is the flex-ibility it offers. Users querying the same edge controller for the same intelligence at different times might receive data from different devices, depending on which devices are available and capable of providing the intelligence at that moment. This ability to source the same intelligence from multiple devices reduces dependency on any single device and enhances the system’s resilience. If a user re-ceives no response to their intelligence query, it could in-dicate that the relevant device is unavailable, or it might be due to security restrictions that prevent access to the intelligence. The intelligence-centric approach is characterized by a loose coupling between devices and the intelligence they generate. This decoupling allows for greater flexibility and scalability, as intelligence can be accessed from any suit-able device without the user needing to manage or even be aware of the underlying hardware. 

3.3.3. Comparison of device-centric and intelligence-centric clustering 

Table 3 provides a comparison of Device-Centric Clus-tering (DCC) and Intelligence-Centric Clustering (ICC) approaches, taking several aspects into account, as sum-marized below. 

Table 3: Comparison of Device-centric clustering (DCC) &intelligence-centric clustering (ICC) approach 

Parameters DCC ICC 

Device Hardware and Intelligence Coupling very tightly coupled very loosely cou-pled Vendor lock-in issue hard to avoid can be easily avoided Management Focus on management of devices. Intelligence wil not be affected. Focus on manage-ment of intelli-gence. Devices wil not be affected. Clustering strat-egy implementa-tion implemented at device level implemented at Edge gateway level Discoverability & observability focus is on edge devices Focus is on edge intelligence Security & pri-vacy Does not help in en-hancing security and privacy Helps in enhanc-ing security and privacy 

• Device Hardware and Intelligence Coupling : DCC shows a “very tightly coupled” relationship between device hardware and the intelligence derived, mean-ing that the intelligence is often inseparable from the device that produces it [48]. On the other hand, in ICC, intelligence is abstracted from the hardware, making it very loosely coupled. 

• Vendor Lock-in Issue : In DCC, the vendor lock-in issue is “hard to avoid” due to the tight coupling between devices and the intelligence they generate. Each vendor might use proprietary data models and standards, making it difficult to integrate devices 9from different vendors [49, 50]. In contrast, in ICC this issue can be easily mitigated because intelligence is loosely coupled with devices, which makes it inter-operable across different vendor devices. 

• Management of Device and Intelligence : The man-agement of devices in DCC directly affects the as-sociated intelligence, as the two are tightly linked. Conversely, in ICC, while intelligence management is crucial, it does not directly impact the management of devices. This makes the system management more independent and flexible. 

• Clustering Strategy Implementation : In DCC, clus-tering is implemented at the device level, requiring updates and coordination across all devices involved in the cluster. In ICC, the clustering strategy is inde-pendent of the device and implemented at the Edge gateway or controller level. 

• Discoverability and observability : In DCC, during the cluster formation process, the discoverability and observability mechanisms primarily focus on the de-vices themselves, regardless of the specific intelli-gence they are capable of. In contrast, ICC shifts the emphasis in discoverability and observability to the intelligence, rather than the underlying devices. This approach in ICC prioritizes the accessibility and management of intelligence, treating the devices as secondary to the information they produce. 

• Security and privacy : In DCC, security and privacy rely on the imposed security mechanisms, which may involve sending sensitive data to the cloud [51]. On the other hand, in ICC, the security and privacy can be enhanced in a way that the intelligences are de-rived on-board and only shared with others. The system is not promoting the sharing of data with other edge devices. 

4. CEI Architecture 

Figure 6 illustrates the three-tiered architecture of Clus-tered Edge Intelligence (CEI), consisting of edge devices at the foundational layer, an edge gateway or controller in the intermediary layer, and the cloud at the top. The architecture’s core objective is the effective management of intelligence within the edge infrastructure. Edge de-vices exhibit two forms of intelligence: Core intelligence ,derived from their own data, and External Intelligence ,which integrates insights from other devices. 

4.1. Edge device layer 

Figure 7 showcases the internal components of an in-dividual edge device within the CEI architecture. Each edge device is connected with multiple sensors, collect-ing environmental data such as temperature, humidity, noise levels, and luminosity at varying intervals. These sensors are either embedded on-board or wirelessly con-nected via technologies like Long Range Wide Area Net-work (LoRaWAN), Wi-Fi, or Bluetooth. The edge device receives the data, processes, interprets, and contextualizes each data point (e.g., identifying whether the value “40” refers to temperature, humidity, or another metric). It is possible that an edge device can be connected to multiple sensors. In such a case, the edge device will be equipped with different varieties of knowledge sets. Further, as discussed before, limited computing resources are available on each edge device. With such limited com-puting resource, edge devices are capable of performing several tasks, including processing specific data types, act-ing on data, executing cloud-based instructions, commu-nicating with other devices, and discovering peers. Con-versely, edge devices have “Requirements,” such as access-ing core intelligence from other devices, retrieving intelli-gence from shared Intelligence Inventories (discussed later), or acquiring specialized knowledge from peers. Addition-ally, edge devices are aware of their Communication Ca-pabilities , including Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or LoRaWAN, en-abling connections with multiple peers across different chan-nels. Each edge device is designed to share its intelligence with others while also utilizing intelligence from other de-vices. When an edge device receives information from its peers, it is called external intelligence . For example, an edge device connected to a CCTV camera can capture footage of its surroundings and detect signs of a fire. At the same time, it may receive external intelligence from nearby devices, such as a sudden increase in temperature. By cross-verifying this information, the device can confirm the presence of a fire with greater confidence. This verified conclusion can also be referred to as core intelligence .Core intelligence External intelligence Knowledge set        

> Edge Device
> Data Data Data Core intelligence External intelligence Knowledge set
> Edge Device
> Data Data Data Core intelligence External intelligence Knowledge set
> Edge Device
> Data Data Data
> Publish
> Consume
> Intelligence Inventory Discovery Mechanism
> Publish
> Publish
> Consume
> Consume
> Edge Gateway or Controller Cloud Environment Intelligence Inventory Discovery Mechanism Regulator Marketplace Sharing Mechanism
> Figure 6: Overall Architecture of CEI

4.2. Edge controller layer 

As mentioned earlier, each edge device is designed to share and collaborate with others. However, the key ques-10 tion is: How can they effectively communicate, collabo-rate, and share their knowledge and intelligence? The answer lies in Figure 5, which illustrates the overall ar-chitecture of Clustered Edge Intelligence (CEI). To enable communication between edge devices, the cloud, and their peers, an edge gateway (or controller) is introduced as an intermediary layer. The edge controller is equipped with two key components: the Intelligence Inventory and the Discovery Mechanism. The Intelligence Inventory is responsible for maintain-ing a record of all available intelligence across connected edge devices. This intelligence is typically shared by multi-ple devices. For example, an intelligence record may indi-cate that traffic is 50% congested or that a road is blocked due to an accident. Each record includes essential meta-data shared by the edge devices, such as: 

• The intelligence (e.g. “amount of electricity produced by solar panels in all city buses” , “level of CO2 at any given point of time” , “level of noise in a specific city area” , etc.) 

• Category (e.g., temperature, humidity, CO 2, PM2.5, soil condition, traffic condition, road condition, etc.) 

• Access URL (to retrieve intelligence) 

• Input and output format (which defines how another edge device should structure its message and what format to expect in response) 

• Confidence score (indicating the reliability of intelli-gence) 

• Application protocol (e.g., MQTT, CoAP, REST API) 

• Communication channel (e.g., LoRaWAN, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), Wi-Fi) The Discovery Mechanism is designed to allow edge de-vices to access external intelligence shared by others. Un-like traditional IoT/edge infrastructure, which focuses on discovering physical devices, this mechanism is dedicated to discovering intelligence. If an edge device requires in-telligence that is not available locally, the discovery mech-anism searches for relevant intelligence across nearby edge devices or intelligence clusters. This enables peer-to-peer intelligence sharing without relying on cloud intervention. It is important to note that the Core Intelligence com-ponent within the edge device is responsible for publish-ing intelligence along with its essential metadata. Mean-while, the External Intelligence component is responsible for consuming shared intelligence by communicating with the edge controller. 

4.3. Cloud Environment layer 

An edge controller has limitations in communicating with and controlling a large number of edge devices. In a large-scale edge infrastructure, there could be thousands Core intelligence     

> External intelligence
> Knowledge set
> Requirements & Capabilities list
> Communication capabilities
> Data Data Data
> sensor-1 sensor-2 sensor-3
> Edge Device
> Figure 7: A detailed view of edge device in CEI.

or even millions of edge controllers. The cloud environ-ment at the top, is equipped with a global view and is responsible for managing and coordinating all edge con-trollers. Similar to an edge controller, the cloud layer also consists of an Intelligence Inventory and a Discov-ery Mechanism components. The discovery mechanism enables an edge controller to identify and access intelli-gence from other edge controllers’ intelligence inventories. Additionally, the cloud layer serves as a global, centralized intelligence repository. Furthermore, with the Intelligence Marketplace compo-nent, the cloud functions as a marketplace where organizations-whether they own AI models, edge devices, or data-can buy, sell, and exchange AI models, decision rules, and other intelligence. The Regulator component within the cloud enforces access control policies, security restrictions, and compliance rules to prevent unauthorized intelligence sharing. The Sharing Mechanism provides necessary in-structions and policies to edge devices, defining what in-telligence should be shared, with which peers, and how frequently. 

4.4. CEI Characteristics 

The effectiveness of CEI depends on a set of core char-acteristics that make the edge agents independent, adapt-able/dynamic, capable of exchanging contextual informa-tion, and collaborate with other agents. Some of the pri-mary characteristics are summarized below: 

• Dynamicity of the environment : In such a large-scale distributed edge systems, devices and agents may frequently join or leave the network due to mobil-ity (e.g., drones, autonomous vehicles), power con-straints, network availability, or hardware failures. This dynamic nature demands that edge agents be context-aware and capable of adjusting their behav-ior in real time - for instance, re-routing communi-cation paths when a node goes offline, or switching from visual to audio input when visibility is poor. 

• Autonomy : The fundamental and inherent charac-teristic of edge agents in such a distributed system is 11 the autonomy, which refers to the ability of each edge agent to operate independently, understand the data and derive all possible intelligence related to that data/information, and execute tasks without requir-ing constant supervision from a cloud-based central entity. The autonomy also in the context of discover-ing other edge agents with different capabilities. For example, in a smart agriculture scenario, an edge agent responsible for crop identification may need to discover and coordinate with another edge agent-possibly on a different drone-tasked with pesticide spraying, without relying on central oversight. 

• Context Awareness & Sharing : Context awareness allows each agent to interpret its environment, un-derstand its current state, and recognize the rele-vance of that information to a shared task. For effec-tive collaborative learning, this becomes important when multiple edge agents are capable of perform-ing the same or similar tasks, but in different en-vironmental or situational contexts. For example, in a Smart Agriculture setting, edge devices such as soil moisture sensors, drones, and weather sta-tions operate across different fields and zones. Adrone monitoring crop health in one area might de-tect signs of pest infestation. By sharing this context with nearby drones or ground sensors, those agents can proactively adjust their scanning or sampling be-haviors, even if they operate in slightly different mi-croclimates or crop types. This shared situational awareness enhances the overall system’s intelligence and its reliability. 

• Inter-Agent Communication Protocols : Because edge environments are resource-constrained and often op-erate under dynamic network conditions, communi-cation must be lightweight, resilient, and low-latency [52]. Common communication paradigms include publish-subscribe models (e.g., MQTT), remote pro-cedure calls (e.g., gRPC), and peer-to-peer messag-ing using custom APIs or agent frameworks. Edge agents should be capable enough to take advantage of available communication channel to announce their presence, share capabilities, request assistance, or synchronize on tasks. For example, a fall detection AI on a wearable device might send an alert to a nearby surveillance camera to verify the event visu-ally before escalating. 

5. Baseline Technologies 

The implementation of the CEI architecture and its ca-pabilities requires a set of enabling technologies that sup-port the representation, communication, discovery, man-agement, and clustering of intelligence across distributed edge infrastructures. In this section, we discuss the key baseline technologies, including abstraction, knowledge graphs, communication mechanisms, and others, that can provide the foundation for implementing CEI. 

5.1. Abstraction 

In layman terms, abstraction is simply the process of hiding some complex information and allowing the system to operate with minimal necessary input from the human. For example, high level programming languages hide the complexity of interacting with the hardware and each and every assembly level executions. The primary advantage of abstraction is that it helps manage complexity. With multiple layers of abstraction, developers and system ad-ministrator can design and implement complex systems by breaking them down into manageable, interconnected, in-dependent components/modules. Some of the benefits lies in portability, flexibility and simplicity. However, excessive or poorly designed abstraction can leverage the complexity and inefficiency of the whole system. Hence, it is essential to find the right balance that provides clarity and utility without compromising the efficiency [53]. The concept of abstraction can be applied in various contexts, primarily in hardware, software, network, data, and functionality, as summarized below: 

• Hardware abstraction: Hardware abstraction is the process of hiding hardware-specific details, offering a generalized interface for the interaction of soft-ware [54]. It ensures software can function across diverse heterogeneous hardware components with-out the need of specification of each component pro-vided by the corresponding vendor. Operating Sys-tem (OS) and device drivers are some of the de-facto examples of Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL). An OS enables software to smoothly interact uniformly with the underlined hardware. On the other hand a device driver bridges a specific hardware compo-nent from a specific vendor to the broader software system, ensuring standardized interactions. 

• Software abstraction: The Modern software system is becoming complex day-by-day. To make is sim-plified and reduce its complexity for the end user, especially the developer, introducing multiple layers of abstraction, also referred to as software abstrac-tion (SA), is the key. SA allows developers to in-teract with the system on a higher level, without understanding the underlying architecture [55, 56]. For instance, developers can use high-level general-purpose programming languages, including Python 4,Java 5, C++ 6, etc., to write code for a variety of ap-plications, without any knowledge about the under-lying architecture. Some other examples of SA can be an API, libraries like jQuery, graphics engine like OpenGL, etc [55]. 

> 4https://www.python.org/
> 5https://www.java.com/en/
> 6https://isocpp.org/

12 • Network abstraction: In a similar fashion, abstrac-tion can also be applied to the network resource man-agement. The network abstraction (NA) can be im-plemented and achieved by introducing higher-level interface for network-related operations like routing, switching, multicasting, tunneling, etc [57]. The ap-plication of NA can be found in a wide variety of domains„ including network protocols, wireless net-work, cloud network, virtual network, etc [58]. 

• Data abstraction: In the era of data as next gen-eration gold, its difficult to understand and get in-sight into the huge amount of unstructured data that comes from large-scale IoT infrastructure and other computing systems. When abstraction is applied to the data, we no longer deal with the raw data and the data container, e.g. stack, queue, linked ilst, etc., rather the knowledge or the information [59, 11, 60]. This is where Machine Learning (ML) and AI related advanced tools come into the picture. DA is espe-cially implemented in the modern database manage-ment system. High-level programming languages can be used to implement DA layer for any modern data-intensive application [60]. For example, the concept of “abstract”, “interface” can be used to create cus-tom data type for real-world physical objects. 

• Functional abstraction: Functional abstract is intro-duced to hide complexity of an algorithm which is designed to perform a specific task so that the use can simply focus on high-level business logic. A user should only pay attention to the calling convention and assume that the function will return the desired result [61]. As an example, in the sqrt function in Java or Python or any mathematical related library, implementation details are abstracted from the ex-act steps involved in finding the square root of any integer value. 

5.1.1. Layers of abstraction in an edge device 

Figure 8 shows different layers of abstraction in a typ-ical edge device capable of preprocessing the input data based on either AI or non-AI-based business logic. Each layer of abstraction hide certain level of complexity making it easier to collect and interact surrounding intelligence. A brief overview of each layer is presented below: 

• Device Hardware Layer : This is the foundational layer of any edge device, including fitness trackers, medical sensors, and smart fire alarms, consists of the physical components and hardware modules [62]. For example, it includes the processor, memory, stor-age, attached sensors (e.g. MPU-6050 gyroscope and accelerometer sensor, HC-SR04 ultrasonic distance sensor), and interfaces such as USB and Wi-Fi. 

• Firmware Layer : Positioned just above the hardware layer, the firmware layer consists of software that 

> Figure 8: Different layers of abstraction in an edge device.

provides low-level control over the device’s hardware. Examples include ARM IoT firmware and CISCO IoT firmware 7. Essentially, firmware bridges the gap between hardware and other software tools, ensur-ing hardware components can execute more complex tasks directed by high-level software layers. 

• Embedded OS Layer : This layer incorporates the OS specifically tailored for embedded systems. Such op-erating systems are optimized for performance and resource usage in devices with constraints on mem-ory, processing power, or battery life. Examples in-clude FreeRTOS 8, Zephyr 9, Mbed 10 , and Raspberry Pi OS 11 . These operating systems manage hardware resources and provide essential services for the soft-ware applications above. 

• Device Connectivity Layer : Serving as the commu-nication layer, it focuses on protocols and technolo-gies that facilitate the device’s ability to connect and 

> 7https://developer.cisco.com/docs/iotod/
> 8https://www.freertos.org/
> 9https://www.zephyrproject.org/
> 10 https://os.mbed.com/
> 11 https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/operating-systems/

13 communicate with other devices or networks. Pro-tocols such as MQTT 12 , CoAP 13 , and BLE ensure seamless data transfer and device interoperability. The MQTT protocol, for example, allows IoT devices and the cloud to communicate with one another. 

• Device Management Layer : This layer emphasizes the administrative aspect of edge devices. It encom-passes functionalities like remote registration, config-uration, provisioning, and monitoring of the device. It ensures that devices function efficiently, securely, and can be updated or diagnosed remotely. 

• API Layer : Standing for Application Programming Interface, this layer offers a set of routines, proto-cols, and tools that allow for the building and in-teraction of software applications. Interfaces such as gRPC 14 , Apache Thrift 15 , and REST ensure that different software components can communicate and work together, providing a consistent and unified ap-proach to accessing device functionalities. 

• Application Layer : This layer includes end-user ap-plications that run on the edge device. The applica-tions are designed for specific tasks like self-driving functionalities, smart grid management, smart agri-culture practices, and more. They utilize services and functions from all the underlying layers to de-liver specific user-centric functionalities. 

• Intelligence Layer : This top layer is envisioned as a core capability of the proposed CEI architecture. It maintains and manages the intelligence available on an edge device, regardless of whether that intel-ligence is generated through an AI model, a non-AI algorithm, a rule-based mechanism, or custom business logic. By abstracting intelligence from the underlying complex implementation and operations, this layer enables intelligence to be identified, pub-lished, discovered, shared, reused, and consumed by other edge agents. 

5.2. Knowledge Graph 

At its core, CEI aims to abstract the intelligence from devices, which will enable discoverability, contextual link-ing, and collaborative reasoning across edge nodes. How-ever, representing intelligences (e.g., CO 2 level trend, tem-perature anomaly) as nodes, connecting them via seman-tic relationships (e.g., affects, correlatesWith, dependsOn) and capturing temporal, spatial, and contextual metadata need the use of knowledge graph as one of the baseline technology [63]. 

> 12 https://mqtt.org/
> 13 https://coap.space/
> 14 https://grpc.io/
> 15 https://thrift.apache.org/

Further, while implementing the edge inventory com-ponent, which tracks what intelligences are available (e.g., “Average CO 2 in Zone B”), which edge device provides it and the corresponding metadata, one candidate solution to implement is the use of a simple key-value pair. How-ever, this approach lacks semantic understanding (e.g., what is i1 about in Figure 5?). The discovery mechanism would also be entirely based on the intelligence ID and not context-based (i.e., “What’s relevant to air pollution?” is not possible to derive). With such a simple key-value pair-based approach, there is no way to relate different intelli-gences (e.g., “ N oiseLevelHigh ” − > “CO 2LikelyHigh ”). Google recently introduced Open Knowledge Format (OKF) 16 , which is an open and vendor-neutral specifi-cation introduced for representing and exchanging knowl-edge in a form readable by both humans and AI agents. This recent development may complement and can be used as the enabling technology for intelligence sharing among edge agents. In the context of CEI, an OKF-inspired rep-resentation could be used to describe intelligence together with its metadata, such as type, description, provider, timestamp, location, confidence, access endpoint, and oth-ers. However, OKF provides a general knowledge rep-resentation format rather than a complete intelligence-management solution; therefore, CEI-specific extensions would still be required to capture specific properties such as freshness, clustering relationships, provenance, spatial and temporal validity, lifecycle state, etc. 

5.2.1. Knowledge-data mapping 

At the edge, raw sensor data is meaningless unless it is contextualized, as discussed before. To participate in in-telligence clustering, sharing, or reasoning, the device and the agent deployed on top of it must know what its data means - and map that data into a knowledge graph node (a semantic description). Without this, devices would just generate and share numbers with each other (e.g., 45 , 97 ), without understanding the meaning of “Temperature” or “PM2.5 pollution”. Thus at the device level, mapping of data to the corresponding knowledge graph would help in sharing a meaningful edge intelligence within the CEI sys-tem. 

5.3. Communication 

For a smooth collaboration among edge agents in a clustered edge intelligence (CEI) ecosystem, communica-tion is the backbone. The communication protocols used in these systems must be lightweight, resilient, and low-latency to meet the demands of dynamic, resource-constrained edge environments. Several communication methods that can be employed in a CEI system to facilitate peer-to-peer intelligence sharing and overall system coordination includes: 

> 16 https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/data-analytics/ how-the-open-knowledge-format-can-improve-data-sharing

14 5.3.1. REST 

REST (Representational State Transfer) is a widely-used architectural style that enables communication be-tween systems over HTTP [64]. In the context of CEI, REST can be used for device-to-cloud communication. While RESTful APIs are not optimized for real-time communica-tion, they are effective for scenarios where simplicity and scalability are crucial, such as periodic updates from edge devices to the cloud or between devices sharing non-time-critical data [65, 66]. 

5.3.2. Pub-Sub 

The Publish-Subscribe (Pub-Sub) model is particularly useful in environments where devices need to communicate asynchronously. In CEI, edge agents can act as either pub-lishers or subscribers. A publisher sends messages (data, intelligence) to a channel, while subscribers receive up-dates from the channel without knowing the identity of the publisher [67]. Pub-Sub systems, such as MQTT or CoAP, are ideal for CEI systems, where edge agents need to broadcast information (such as sensor readings or alerts) to multiple other devices or services without direct, one-to-one communication on a real-time basis. 

5.3.3. 5G/6G and LoRAWAN 

Advanced communication technologies like 5G and 6G are becoming critical for supporting high-speed, low-latency, and wide-coverage communications in edge computing net-works. These technologies are capable of handling the vast amounts of data generated by edge devices, ensuring that the exchange of intelligence by edge agents is fast and re-liable [68, 69]. For example, in a smart city application, edge agents distributed across a large geographic area may use 5G or 6G networks to send and receive data about traffic, pollution levels, or emergency responses. Further, LoRaWAN (Long Range Wide Area Network) ensures that intelligence can be shared among devices even in isolated areas, thanks to its design for low-power and long-range communication. 

5.4. Discoverability 

Discoverability is one of fundamental enablers in CEI. In contrast to traditional edge and IoT systems (i.e., where discovery mechanisms primarily focus on devices, services, or network endpoints [70, 71]), CEI requires mechanisms that treat intelligence itself as a first-class, discoverable, and observable (more on observability in next subsection) entity. This shift is essential because CEI operates in highly dynamic, large-scale environments where intelligence is continuously generated, updated, expires, or migrates across heterogeneous edge devices. Discoverability in CEI refers to the ability of edge agents and controllers to identify the intelligence that exists, where it is available, and under what context it is relevant. Unlike conventional service discovery, which relies on static iden-tifiers such as service names or IP addresses, intelligence Service  

> Request Service
> Client AUser
> Service Consumer/Client
> Service Registry
> Query service
> location & instance
> Accessing
> Service
> Load Balancer
> Service B
> Registry
> client
> 10.1.1.10:4000
> Service C
> Registry
> client 10.1.1.11:4001
> Service D 10.1.1.12:4002
> Registry
> client
> Service E 10.1.1.13:4003
> Registration
> Registry
> client
> API
> API
> API
> API
> Figure 9: A general architecture of service discovery

discovery must be semantic- and context-aware. These approaches have been shown to scale well for cloud-native services [72, 73], but they lack native support for semantic reasoning, contextual filtering, and confidence-aware selec-tion, which are required in intelligence-centric systems. To address these limitations, CEI aligns with research in se-mantic IoT and context-aware discovery, where resources are described using metadata and semantic annotations rather than raw identifiers. Sheth et al. demonstrated that semantically enriched discovery significantly improves interoperability and automated reasoning in sensor-rich environments [4]. Such works support the need for in-telligence descriptors that include category, spatial scope, temporal validity, and dependencies on other intelligences. Large-scale distributed systems rely on dedicated dis-covery mechanisms operating across different architectural layers, including service, device, and network discovery. Such mechanisms can be implemented using either a cen-tralized or a distributed (client–server) model, depending on scalability, latency, and fault-tolerance requirements. The following subsection describes these discovery mecha-nisms and discusses their relevance in the context of intelligence-centric edge systems. 

5.4.1. Service Discovery 

Service Discovery (SD), commonly used in distributed systems, is the process of automatically discovering and lo-cating a (or a set of) service(s) based on the request made by the user or another service [74], as shown in Figure 9. The request may comprise functional and non-functional requirements, as well as a service description. A Service Registry (SR) is typically implemented as a database of all services, including their network locations and service instances. It is the service provider’s responsibility to reg-ister their services with the service registry. The service registry can be implemented on the client or server side. Irrespective of the implementation, SR should be highly available and provide real-time information on the health and availability of all services. Several open-source and commercial service discovery solutions are available in the market. Some of the popular SD solutions are described below: 

• Docker Hub 17 , a server-side discovery service, is an 

> 17 https://hub.docker.com/

15 essential component of the Docker ecosystem, pro-viding a central location for managing and sharing Docker images. Users can create and manage their own repositories for Docker images, as well as search for and download public images created by other users. When a user searches for or pushes an up-dated Docker image through the Docker Command Line Interface (CLI) or REST API, the request is sent to Docker Hub’s servers. Upon receiving the request, Docker Hub uses its server-side search to find the requested image or stores the newly created image in the appropriate repository. Additional fea-tures help streamline Docker container development, including automated builds, webhooks, and access control. 

• Apache ZooKeeper 18 , a server-side discovery service and an open-source Apache project, offers a central-ized and reliable way for distributed systems to coor-dinate and synchronize with each other. It provides a hierarchical namespace, similar to a file system, where clients can store and access data. Clients can use ZooKeeper to discover service locations, monitor configuration changes, and synchronize data across multiple nodes in a distributed system. Coordina-tion services are provided for client applications by a set of ZooKeeper servers. ZooKeeper’s server-side infrastructure coordinates and synchronizes interac-tions between client applications and the distributed coordination service. 

• Hysterix 19 is an old project created to fulfill Netflix’s needs. Hystrix, a client-side discovery service, is a latency- and fault-tolerance library designed to iso-late access to remote services, systems, and libraries. By doing this, Hysterix protects against and controls potential latency and failures caused by external de-pendencies. In addition, Hysterix facilitates moni-toring, alerting, and operational control in near real time. Hysterix relies primarily on manual and pre-configured settings and is not suitable for modern and real-time applications. 

• HashiCorp Consul 20 is a service discovery, configura-tion, network automation, and orchestration tool. It provides a centralized registry of services and their metadata, allowing clients to discover services, se-curely establish communication among services, au-tomate network routing, and control service access. When a new service is added to a network, it reg-isters itself with the Consul agent running on each node. The agent sends the metadata of the newly added service, including IP address, port number, and health status, to the Consul server, which stores 

> 18 https://zookeeper.apache.org/
> 19 https://github.com/netflix/hystrix
> 20 https://www.consul.io/

it in its registry in key-value pairs. Such data can be updated in real time without service interruption caused by a restart event. Clients can then use Con-sul to discover the service location using the service name. Consul can also be used for distributed lock-ing, enabling coordination between services in a dis-tributed system. 

• Etcd 21 , an open-source tool, is a distributed key-value store popular for its reliability, consistency, and scalability features. This is used for implementing a configuration registry and service discovery for dis-tributed systems, such as Kubernetes. Similar to ZooKeeper and Consul, Etcd is a server-side discov-ery service that provides a centralized mechanism for distributed systems to coordinate and synchronize. 

• Traefik 22 is an open-source tool designed to provide automatic service discovery and incoming request routing ability to backend services. Request routing is based on a set of predefined rules configured man-ually. This can be integrated with other service reg-istries, including the above-mentioned Consul, Etcd. In addition, this can be considered a reverse proxy and load balancer. 

• SkyDNS 23 is another popular server-side discovery tool commonly used with other tools in the Kuber-netes ecosystem. In the SkyDNS service discovery and management solution, containerized microser-vice instances are given a unique Domain Name Sys-tem (DNS) name and a mapped IP address. Users send the service name, and SkyDNS returns the mapped IP address to use for communication. 

5.4.2. Device Discovery 

Device Discovery (DD) is the first step toward enabling a successful Device-to-Device (D2D) communication. It is the process of finding, locating, and eventually establish-ing communication among nearby devices or devices con-nected to LAN, WAN, or the Internet [75]. A Device can be a computer, printer, router, switch, smartphone, or any other IoT device with a unique IP address for communi-cation. Similar to the SD, DD can be of two types based on its implementation: (a) centralized and (b) distributed. In a centralized DD, a central server (e.g., a base station or access point) assists in discovering, monitoring, and man-aging all connected devices. The centralized entity main-tains a database of all the devices, including their unique IP, MAC address, hostname, device status, and other rele-vant information. The discovery client sends the discovery request to this centralized entity and acquires the required information. On the other hand, in distributed DD, each 

> 21 https://www.cncf.io/projects/etcd/
> 22 https://traefik.io/
> 23 https://github.com/skynetservices/skydns

16 device is responsible for performing discovery by period-ically sending its own information, including IP address, MAC address, and other relevant data, to other devices on the same network. Other devices respond to this in-formation based on the requirement and update the local database if there is any update [76]. Some of the recent use cases where DD is critical are health care services, smart home applications, industry 4.0, Industrial IoT, smart transportation, VANETs, and emergency services [77]. A wide range of protocols and tools are used for device discovery, including Simple Net-work Management Protocol (SNMP), Ping, Internet Con-trol Message Protocol (ICMP), and network scanner tools such as Nmap 24 and SolarWinds 25 .

5.4.3. Network Discovery 

Unlink DD, Network Discovery (ND) focuses on know-ing the entire network including the devices and all the pairs of existing connections among the devices. It is also essential to know if there is no connection between a pair of devices [78]. It allows the network administrator to identify and map the topology of the network, understand the flows of data through the network, and identify po-tential bottlenecks or vulnerabilities [79]. The topology of the network can be obtained in several ways, such as (a) by broadcasting discovery messages to neighboring de-vices with information about their network interfaces, IP addresses, and other relevant information, (b) by using a scanning tool, such as nmap , to scan all connected devices and accessing device information, and (c) by analyzing the network traffic which provides the source and target device information. 

5.5. Observability 

Complementary to discoverability (as discussed in Sec-tion 5.4), observability is another important baseline ca-pability for realizing CEI. Observability, in conventional distributed< systems, refers to the ability to understand and obtain the insights of the internal state and behav-ior of a system by continuously observing or collecting the available signals, such as logs, metrics, and traces [80]. Observability can be seen in a wide range of domains ranging from microservices [81, 82, 83], to containers and from cluster of computing nodes to edge-cloud distributed computing continuum [84, 85, 86]. In such systems, ob-servability is mainly used to observe the systems behav-ior under different circumstances and loads, monitor ser-vice health, execution latency, resource utilization, fail-ures, and communication bottlenecks [87]. However, this conventional observability system is not sufficient for CEI, because the primary entity being man-aged is not only a IoT sensor, edge device, service, network endpoint, or deployed AI models and business logic, but 

> 24 https://nmap.org/
> 25 https://www.solarwinds.com/

the intelligence produced and consumed across heteroge-neous edge agents in a distributed computing continuum. It must understood and implemented as intelligence-level observability. This must have the capabilities to contin-uously observe and collect signals related to the state, quality, reliability, and usability of available intelligence. Since intelligence in CEI is treated as a first-class entity, it is not enough to know whether an edge device is ac-tive or whether a communication link is available. The observability system must provides insights on whether a particular intelligence is fresh, valid, reliable, semantically consistent, and suitable for the current context. For exam-ple, in a fire-detection intelligence cluster, the intelligence related to recent CO 2 increase, temperature rise, humid-ity change, and air-quality variation must be observable in terms of their generation time, update frequency, confi-dence score, and current availability. It is to be noted that discoverability (as discussed be-fore) and observability are different and complementary to each other. Discoverability answers the question: “Which intelligence is available and where can it be accessed?” .On the other hand, observability answers a different ques-tion: “Can this intelligence be trusted and used at this mo-ment?” . An edge agent may discover multiple sources of intelligence that provide similar information, such as traf-fic congestion level in a specific road segment. However, the selection of the most suitable source depends on ob-servable properties such as freshness, confidence, latency, and provenance. Similar conclusions have been reached in knowledge-centric networking and fog computing research, where observable and semantically described knowledge artifacts outperform static, data-centric approaches in dy-namic environments [88, 89, 85]. There are several tools/implementation available in the research and industrial practice that can be used as the baseline. This includes, OpenTelemetry 26 , MLflow 27 , Dy-natrace 28 , AgentTrace 29 . However designing and imple-menting observability within CEI architecture is still an open-ended research question and needs further investiga-tion. Some of the key research challenges include decid-ing between fully centralized and distributed observability mechanisms, design of lightweight, hierarchical, and adap-tive observability mechanism, and design of standard ob-servable attributes for intelligence. 

5.6. Clustering mechanisms 

The heart of CEI is the mechanism on how to efficiently cluster the intelligence components that are available at the edge through large number of edge devices. To the best of our knowledge, no specific clustering algorithm is developed to perform the same for inteligence. However, 

> 26 https://opentelemetry.io/
> 27 https://mlflow.org/
> 28 https://www.dynatrace.com/monitoring/platform/observability-solution
> 29 https://github.com/tensorstax/agenttrace

17 we believe that the existing clustering mechanisms, such as K-means, Affinity Propagation (AP), Mean-shift, Spec-tral clustering, Ward hierarchical clustering, Agglomera-tive clustering, DBSCAN [90], OPTICS, Gaussian mix-tures, BIRCH [91], etc. can be used as the baseline for design and development of clustering mechanisms only for intelligence. Further, it is believed that not a single clus-tering approach can address the problem where, the clus-tering can be done based on different context, type and other parameters. Centroid-based methods, such as mini-batch K-means and distributed K-means variants (e.g., k-means), are commonly employed when the approximate number of clusters is known. However, for scenarios where intelligences may exhibit irregular relationships, noise, or varying cluster densities, hierarchical density-based meth-ods, such as scalable or approximate variants of HDB-SCAN can be adopted over k-nearest-neighbor graphs, as they can discover clusters of arbitrary shape while filtering out weak or noisy intelligences. In highly dynamic environ-ments where intelligences continuously appear, evolve, or expire, streaming clustering frameworks based on micro-cluster and macro-cluster abstractions (e.g., CluStream-, DenStream-, or ClusTree-style approaches) can be adopted. Since the research is in its very early stage, how the exist-ing clustering mechanisms can be used as baseline is still needs to be investigated. 

5.7. Other baseline technologies 

Before intelligence can be clustered, it must be devel-oped, deployed, managed in an effective way. This man-agement spans the entire intelligence lifecycle - from de-velopment and packaging to deployment, execution, up-date, and uninstall. All the operations require supporting technologies that are already well matured, including IaC, containerization, orchestration, blockchain for security [92] and several others. Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) can be used to declare the specification of intelligence, includ-ing the underlined dependencies of hosting environments, such as edge and cloud resources, as a code. Container-ization technologies can be used to package intelligence, along with the corresponding AI models, algorithms, or rule-based logic and their runtime dependencies. On top of this, orchestration frameworks can be used to coordi-nate the deployment, scaling, migration, and termination of intelligence instances across edge-cloud computing con-tinuum. 

6. Research Dimensions 

6.1. Intelligence marketplace (IM) Intelligence Marketplace , a.k.a Edge Intelligence Mar-ketplace (EIM), can be considered as a platform or a ecosys-tem where intelligence (derived using AI-based models, al-gorithms, or even if-else rules) can be exchanged, bought or sold between the Edge Intelligence Producer (EIP) and the buyer. On the contrary, the similar term marketplace intel-ligence refers to the process of collection and making use of the data and knowledge related to different marketplaces, e.g. data marketplace and e-commerce marketplace, The discussion in this paper revolves around the concept of EIM (and not marketplace intelligence ), different poten-tial stakeholders and their interests and interactions. For example, a city government for traffic management may buy intelligence (based on AI models or algorithm) that predict congestion based on vehicle counter and optimize traffic light timing on a real-time. Such intelligence can be remotely deployed on the edge device inside traffic light by the intelligence provider (IP) or seller. Another example in the context of smart agriculture is that a farm operator might buy and deploy rule-based or AI-based intelligence for optimal prediction of watering times based on weather data and soil moisture sensors and control basic irrigation. The farm operator may remotely deploy this intelligence on an edge device installed near the farmland. Marketplace Provider (MP)  

> Intelligence catalog
> Requirement– capability matching
> Metadata management
> Recommendation engine
> Pricing & licensing
> Deployment orchestration
> Intelligence Consumer (IC)
> Requirement specification
> Intelligence discovery & Selection
> Compatibility validation
> Deployment automation
> Requirement specification
> City government
> (smart city authority, traffic management agencies, etc.)
> Transportation department
> Utility companies (energy, water)
> Smart agriculture operators
> Healthcare service providers
> Intelligence Provider (IP)
> Logistics and supply-chain operators
> Intelligence development
> Intelligence packaging
> Metadata annotation Intelligence publishing
> Versioning & updates
> AI/ML solution vendors
> IoT analytics companies
> Traffic analytics companies
> Industrial automation vendors

Figure 10: Interaction of stakeholders within Intelligence Market-place 

Potential stakeholders of Edge Intelligence Marketplace, as shown in Figure 10: 

• Intelligence Provider (IP) : These can be developers, companies, or individuals who create AI models, new algorithms, or decision rules. They publish these on the marketplace. For examples, IoT and sensor data analytics companies (e.g. PTC (ThingWorx), 18 Siemens MindSphere, or Cisco IoT) can provide/sell intelligence such as predictive maintenance of sen-sors, edge devices, anomaly detection in edge device, etc. Traffic and transportation analytics firms may provide/sell AI-models based intelligence that give the current traffic congestion and insights. 

• Intelligence Consumer : Intelligence Consumers (IC) typically the business entities or individuals or gov-ernments have existing infrastructure and systems in place (e.g., sensors, edge devices and infrastruc-ture). Such consumers may lack deep AI expertise or resources to build models from scratch and hence rely on pre-built intelligence from the marketplace to solve their specific problems. They need specific domain-specific intelligence that is aligned with their operational goals or industry challenges. IC browses the marketplace and select the intelligence (whether it is based on a complex AI model, a simpler algo-rithm, or an if-else rule set) that suits their needs and compatible with their existing edge infrastructure. 

• Marketplace provider : The Marketplace Provider (MP) can be seen as a trusted platform where intelligence consumer and provider gathered. Intelligence provider (IP) lists the intelligence with a set of metadata and and pricing/licensing terms. In addition, the IP should also be responsible for updating and main-taining intelligences. On the other hand, intelligence consumer would specify his/her requirements, search and select intelligences, acquire usage rights, deploy them onto its edge resources, and utilize their out-puts for application-level decision-making. The MP could be seen as a combination of e-commerce plat-form (like Amazon) and model hub (like Hugging Face Hub) with the additional capabilities of match-ing consumer’s requirement and providers capabili-ties, recommendation system for both IP and IC and an cost-analytics system. 

6.2. Intelligence discoverability & observability 

In a system with minimal human intervention, an edge agent must be capable of discovering other relevant intel-ligences in order to cross-verify and validate its own in-telligence before publishing it. Furthermore, when new intelligence becomes available within the edge infrastruc-ture system, an edge agent should be able to utilize it to improve the reliability and accuracy of its own intelligence. A key research challenge, however, lies in how to design, develop, and implement an intelligence discovery mecha-nism in resource-constrained environments. Existing dis-covery mechanisms-whether service discovery, device dis-covery, or network discovery-cannot be directly adopted for intelligence discovery. Another major challenge is the observability of intelligence, such as monitoring its avail-ability and freshness. Designing a fully distributed observ-ability mechanism, where each edge agent monitors other intelligences, would be both network- and computation-intensive. Conversely, a fully centralized observability sys-tem introduces inherent and obvious challenges, includ-ing single points of failure, scalability bottlenecks, and in-creased latency. 

6.3. Intelligence lifecycle automation 

Similar to lifecycle automation of software systems in production environment, intelligence lifecycle involves de-velopment (using AI models, algorithms, or rule-based logic), packaging, deployment to edge devices or controllers, con-figuration, execution, monitoring, update or adaptation, and finally uninstalling the intelligence. Automation can be applied on multiple levels of this lifecycle, from basic deployment and start/stop operations to advanced capa-bilities including automated scaling, migration, versioning, rollback, and context-driven reconfiguration based on en-vironmental changes [86]. While implementing such au-tomation the potential research challenges that we may encounter are how to maintain consistency, how to han-dle inter-dependencies among multiple intelligences, and manage heterogeneous device capabilities. The implemen-tation of automation become more cumbersome in coor-dinating lifecycle actions across distributed edge agents while maintaining low latency, scalability, and fault toler-ance. The existing orchestrators are matured enough to carry out the lifecycle operations. However, such solutions are not suitable for performing the lifecycle operations on the resource devices at the edge of the network. One approach to address this research challenge is to ensure the aumation while the orchestrator being deployed on the cloud envi-ronment. However, this will not be an distributed solution and hence issues such as network stability may become an obstacle in ensuring lifecycle automation. The other ap-proach is to design the orchestrator small enough so that it can be installed on the resource constraint edge devices and responsible to taking care of each edge device sepa-rately. 

6.4. Clustering mechanism 

This is one of the primary focus area, as an efficient clustering mechanism would determine how individual in-telligences are grouped, managed and leveraged for collab-orative decision-making. The clustering may follow a man-ual process, a policy-driven approach defined by adminis-trators, an algorithmic approach based on classical cluster-ing mechanisms, ML methods, or Large Language Model (LLM)-assisted semantic reasoning. The open-ended re-search questions are where clustering logic resides and who decides the clusters? Clusters may be formed locally by the edge agents, coordinated by the edge controllers or gateways or orchestrated at the cloud level depending on the latency and scalability. Another research aspect is the nature of the cluster itself: in CEI, clusters do not necessarily have a physical manifestation and are primar-ily logical/virtual constructs that represent relationships 19 among intelligences rather than underlined co-located de-vices. Such logical clusters may be instantiated, main-tained, or visualized at different layers of the edge-cloud computing continuum. Considering above questions, the research challenges may include designing adaptive cluster-ing mechanisms that can operate across computing layers and ensures that the clusters are meaningful, consistent and dynamic. 

6.5. Use of language models 

Use of language model could be one potential solution to identify and establish relationships among multiple in-telligences (e.g., which intelligences participate in remote fire detection or traffic congestion estimation) instead of manually curating clusters. LLM can fill the gap where CEI needs context-aware, multi-constraint clustering and discovery over several artifacts, including AI models, al-gorithms, rules. LLMs can help in translating natural-language intents (e.g., “form a fire-detection cluster for for-est zone X with freshness < 2 min and confidence > 0.8”) into structured queries over inventories/knowledge graphs using specific language. Modern language models can also help in figuring out how intelligence from edge agents are related (like what affects what ( correlatesWith ), what re-lies on what ( dependsOn ), and what confirms what (vali-dates)) to suggest candidate clusters and justifications. Language models can be used to complement the for-mation of clusters. This means LLM can help us find the relationship among multiple intelligence. For exam-ple, what are the intelligences that can take participate in detecting the fire in a remote location. Another exam-ple is “what are the intelligence that can be considered to estimate the traffic congestion?” 

6.6. Interoperability and Standardization 

As discussed before, there could be multiple IPs and ICs. In such a situation, intelligences may be generated by different vendors, implemented using different AI models, algorithms, or rule-based logic, and executed on edge de-vices with varying hardware capabilities, OS, and commu-nication protocols. Intelligence management will become fragmented and difficult to scale across computing contin-uum if there is no common standard for intelligence repre-sentation, description of metadata, communication inter-face and protocols, and lifecycle operations. For example, the IP publishing the traffic congestion related intelligence may expect the vehicle count data in a JSON format for MQTT. Similarly, the IP publishing pollution monitoring-related intelligence may expect the CO 2 data in a different schema over REST. Without standardized data formats, interface, and metadata description, these two intelligences cannot be combined or clustered. 

7. Use cases 

7.1. Industry 4.0 

In industry 4.0, such CEI can be applied on a wide range of activities, including predictive maintenance clus-ter for CNC machines, conveyor belt fault validation clus-ter, robotic arm collision-risk cluster, industrial fire and gas leak detection cluster, compressor health check, vibration-temperature-pressure anomaly cluster, industrial wastew-ater discharge compliance cluster, and many more [93]. For example, one edge device attached to a gas sensor may publish intelligence like “abnormal rise of methane in Zone B”. Another edge device with a thermal camera may publish “heat anomaly near valve section”. A third edge device may publish “real-time increase of smoke”, while a fourth edge device may publish “unstable ventila-tion detected”. These separate intelligences can be clus-tered semantically. If gas anomaly, heat anomaly, and smoke-related intelligence appear together within the same time window and location, the cluster can raise a high-confidence “probable fire/gas leak incident in Zone B” alert. Similarly, if vibration anomaly combines with unusual tem-perature rise and pressure deviation from the same ma-chine section, the cluster may infer “high likelihood of me-chanical degradation”, “possible bearing failure”, “seal leak-age”, or “pump cavitation risk”, depending on the context and rules used. 

7.2. Smart City & Traffic Management System 

Similar to Industry 4.0, the potential of CEI can be seen on a wide range of smart city and traffic manage-ment related activities, including pedestrian crowding risk cluster, flooded road detection cluster, road accident con-firmation cluster, emergency vehicle priority cluster, ille-gal parking validation cluster, traffic congestion estimation cluster, low-visibility hazard cluster, intersection collision-risk cluster, and many more [94]. For instance, an edge device with roadside camera may publish intelligence like “high pedestrian density near crossing A”. Another edge device at a smart traffic signal may publish “extended pedestrian waiting time”. A third edge device near a bus stop may publish “unusual crowd buildup”, while a fourth edge device may publish “sharp increase in nearby de-vice presence”. Clustering the above intelligence, a high-confidence “probable pedestrian crowding risk near cross-ing A” event can be derived reliably. Similarly, if the same cluster also observes repeated road crossing attempts and reduced walking space, it may infer “high likelihood of un-safe pedestrian spillover”. 

7.3. Smart Agricultural 

With recent advancements, drone technology is becom-ing more affordable, reliable, and efficient. Drones equipped with multiple sensors, along with complementary technolo-gies such as satellite image analysis, are increasingly being used in smart agriculture [95]. In the context of CEI, one 20 edge device connected to a wind sensor may publish intel-ligence such as “strong gust activity detected in Plot A”. Another edge device attached to a weather station may publish “rapid drop in atmospheric pressure”. A third edge device mounted on a crop-monitoring camera may publish “visible crop bending beyond normal range”, while a fourth edge device may publish “soil surface dryness reducing root grip”. These separate intelligences can be clustered seman-tically. For instance, if strong gust activity, pressure insta-bility, and abnormal crop bending appear together within the same time window and location, the cluster can gen-erate a high-confidence intelligence alert such as “probable wind-damage risk in Plot A”. CEI, together with drone technology, can support a wide range of agricultural activities, including waterlog-ging detection, crop disease early warning, rainfall–soil moisture inconsistency detection and prediction, and many more. 

7.4. Other use cases 

Beyond the above use cases, CEI can also be applied in healthcare monitoring systems, home automation, in-dustrial safety, transportation [96], public infrastructure monitoring, environmental protection, collision avoidance in UAV system [97, 98] and many other domains. The key idea remains the same across all these use cases: instead of relying on a single edge device or a single type of intelli-gence, multiple related intelligences generated at the edge can be semantically clustered to produce a more reliable and context-aware outcome. 

8. Literature Survey 

This section reviews the academic landscape around EI and CEI across three core dimensions: first, we examine the shifting taxonomies of edge intelligence, highlighting the transition to intelligence as independent assets. Sec-ond, we survey the semantic technologies required to rep-resent and codify knowledge across heterogeneous nodes in a system. Third, we analyze the paradigm shift from hardware-bound device networks to insight-driven clus-ters. Table 4 summarizes the literature considered. 

8.1. Paradigms and Taxonomy of Edge Intelligence 

Existing surveys and taxonomies in EI have targeted mainly the first two paradigms discussed in this paper: EI-1F and EI-2F. Closely aligning to these two paradigms, Deng et al. [99] distinguish between “intelligence-enabled edge computing” and “artificial intelligence on the edge”. Xu et al. [100] take an additional step in their survey, where they identify four cross-cutting applications of EI: edge caching, edge training, edge inference, and edge of-floading. Stadnicka et al. [103] conducted a large-scale industrial review where they investigated the potentials of EI for various domains. Across these potential appli-cations, Chen et al. [101] review the importance of deep learning techniques as an enabler for adaptive and robust decision-making; Zhou et al. [89] strike a similar chord, discussing the importance of deep learning for edge en-vironments to split and distribute intelligence within an architecture. Lastly, Gill et al. [102] widen the scope and describe the architectures to facilitate the interaction and collaborating of distributed software components. Despite this compact body of work, few ideas revolve around the third paradigm discussed in this paper: EI-3F—the intelligence available at the edge, where the ab-stract, derived insights themselves—rather than raw data or hardware models—are treated as independent, first-class manageable entities. This work addresses this gap. 

8.2. Semantic Representation and Abstraction at the Edge 

To codify, comprehend, and exchange knowledge across heterogeneous edge environments, current research heav-ily leverages semantic web technologies, ontologies, and knowledge graphs. Early foundational efforts standard-ized the physical layer: Haller et al. [104] introduced the modular SOSA /SSN ontologies for sensors, actuators, and observations, while Li et al. [105] evaluated Web of Things (WoT) ontologies to drive cross-layer data interoperabil-ity and federation. As these standards matured, modeling shifted toward edge infrastructure; for instance, Ghrab et al. [11] proposed EdgeOnto to automate the IoT service lifecycle by mapping node capabilities and Quality of Ser-vice (QoS) constraints. Lastly, to elevate raw data into actionable EI, Zhang et al. [108] highlighted context-aware and real-time information fusion as core mechanisms . While standardized ontologies effectively describe data sources and infrastructure, they fail to manage abstract insights as independent assets. To federate intelligence effectively, edge knowledge graphs must model these in-sights as distinct nodes connected by explicit semantic re-lationships (e.g., affects, correlatesWith) rather than flat, semantics-free key-value pairs. This shows a gap for on-tologies that explicitly encapsulate metadata native to ab-stract insights, including provenance, confidence levels, ge-ographic scope, temporal freshness, clustering relationships, and operational lifecycle states. 

8.3. From Device-Centric to Clustering-Centric 

The coordination of distributed edge nodes is shifting from physical topologies to intelligence-based grouping. Traditional DCC is grouping edge nodes or IoT devices rigidly by geographic proximity, communication distance, or sensing coverage [47]. For instance, Achkouty et al. [8] and Takale et al. [9] propose spatial clustering to manage device coverage, energy, and storage limits. While these methods optimize data aggregation and network lifetime, they treat nodes strictly as physical containers bounded by hardware and network constraints. Even distributed archi-tectures, like FL, commonly rely on centralized cloud co-ordinators; this shows a need for multi-edge clustering and direct node communication [107]. For instance, Dehury et 21 Ref. Year Focus Area Article Type Topic Zhou et al. [89] 2019 Paradigms and Taxonomy Review Technologies and frameworks enabling EI Deng et al. [99] 2020 Paradigms and Taxonomy Vision Overview of EI paradigms Xu et al. [100] 2020 Paradigms and Taxonomy Survey Fundamental components of EI Chen et al. [101] 2019 Paradigms and Taxonomy Review Implications of deep learning for EI Gill et al. [102] 2025 Paradigms and Taxonomy Survey Collaborative EI architectures Stadnicka et al. [103] 2022 Paradigms and Taxonomy Review Industrial applications of EI Zhang et al. [96] 2022 Semantics and Abstractions Survey Information fusion as an enabler for EI Ghrab et al. [11] 2023 Semantics and Abstractions Review Ontologies for IoT and Edge computing Haller et al. [104] 2019 Semantics and Abstractions Review Ontologies for sensing and processing Li et al. [105] 2019 Semantics and Abstractions Review Ontologies for Internet of Things Dehury et al. [47] 2022 Intelligence Clustering Research Emergence of CEI based on topologies Achkouty et al. [8] 2024 Intelligence Clustering Research Intelligence clusters in IoT networks Takale et al. [9] 2025 Intelligence Clustering Research Usage of CEI for improved FL Zhang et al. [106] 2025 Intelligence Clustering Survey Usage of agentic AI as enabler for EI Mughal et al. [107] 2024 Intelligence Clustering Research Usage of CEI for improved FL Table 4: Overview of literature revolving around EI and its applications, categorized into three focus areas. 

al. [47] form logical clusters based on the specific intelli-gence devices possess rather than their physical parame-ters, enabling decentralized peer collaboration with mini-mal energy expenditure. Furthermore, Zhang et al. [106] show how agentic AI enables edge systems to run continu-ous perception–reasoning–action loops, allowing nodes to cluster autonomously based on semantic relevance. By treating intelligence as a manageable asset, ICC bypasses hardware vendor lock-in and fosters decentralized collab-oration across dynamic edge continuums. In summary, we can report that DCC emerges as a powerful enabler for CEI, allowing distributed entities to act as autonomous and self-organized agents [106], or by-pass traditional centralized architectures [107]. Thus, we conclude that CEI is an emerging field with high potential, with most available works focusing on original research, rather than established surveys and reviews (Table 4). 

9. Conclusions and Future Works 

In this paper, we introduced Clustered Edge Intelli-gence (CEI) as a vision that redefine Edge Intelligence be-yond the conventional use of AI for edge resource manage-ment and the deployment of lightweight AI models on edge devices. The existing edge systems provide limited sup-port for managing derived intelligence as an independent entity that can be discovered, shared, reused, and com-bined across heterogeneous edge devices. The proposed CEI framework filled this gap by first interpreting edge intelligence as the intelligence available at the edge and treating such intelligence as a first-class entity. This intel-ligence may be derived using AI models, conventional algo-rithms, rule-based mechanisms, or custom business logic. The proposed CEI framework shifts the focus from device-centric clustering to intelligence-centric clustering. Such clusters allow edge agents to combine and cross-validate intelligence generated by heterogeneous devices without necessarily sharing raw data. It is important to note that CEI is presented as a vision and reference ar-chitecture rather than as an implemented and empirically evaluated system. To support the realization of CEI, we discussed a set of baseline technologies, including abstrac-tion, knowledge graphs, communication mechanisms, in-telligence discovery and observability, clustering techniques, life cycle automation, containerization, orchestration, and intelligence marketplaces. Furthermore, we investigated several potential research directions in this emerging do-main, such as intelligence-centric clustering, distributed intelligence inventories, semantic discoverability, intelligence observability, life cycle management, interoperability, stan-dardization, and the use of LLMs for identifying relation-ships among heterogeneous intelligence. Despite the wide range of potential research directions, we are currently focusing on developing a CEI prototype and defining a standard representation for intelligence, in-cluding its identity, provenance, confidence, freshness, and communication requirements. Our future work also in-cludes designing lightweight and adaptive mechanisms for intelligence discovery, observability, and lifecycle manage-ment across the distributed computing continuum. 

Acknowledgement 

This work is partially funded by IISER Berhampur, in-stitutional seed grant SG/CKD/050225. This work is also partially supported by the EU’s TALENTS (101299722) project. 

References 

[1] J. Rowley, The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the dikw hierarchy, Journal of information science 33 (2) (2007) 163–180. [2] S. J. Russell, Artificial intelligence a modern ap-proach, Pearson Education, Inc., 2010. [3] Ieee standard glossary of software engineering terminology, IEEE Std 610.12-1990 (1990) 1– 84doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.1990.101064. [4] A. Sheth, C. Henson, S. S. Sahoo, Semantic sensor web, IEEE Internet computing 12 (4) (2008) 78–83. 22 [5] C. K. Gately, L. R. Hutyra, S. Peterson, I. S. Wing, Urban emissions hotspots: Quantifying vehicle con-gestion and air pollution using mobile phone gps data, Environmental pollution 229 (2017) 496–504. [6] J. Espadaler-Clapés, E. Barmpounakis, N. Geroli-minis, Traffic congestion and noise emissions with detailed vehicle trajectories from uavs, Transporta-tion Research Part D: Transport and Environment 121 (2023) 103822. [7] J. Du, L. Zhao, J. Feng, X. Chu, Compu-tation offloading and resource allocation in mixed Fog/Cloud computing systems with min-max fairness guarantee, IEEE Transac-tions on Communications 66 (4) (2018) 1594–1608. doi:10.1109/TCOMM.2017.2787700. [8] F. Achkouty, L. Gallon, R. Chbeir, Rdsc: Range-based device spatial clustering for iot networks, Sen-sors 24 (17) (2024) 5851. [9] A. K. Takele, B. Villányi, Resource-efficient clus-tered federated learning framework for industry 4.0 edge devices, Ai 6 (2) (2025) 30. [10] B. A. Begum, S. V. Nandury, Data aggregation pro-tocols for wsn and iot applications–a comprehensive survey, Journal of King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences 35 (2) (2023) 651–681. [11] S. Ghrab, I. Lahyani, S. Yangui, M. Jmaiel, A core iot ontology for automation support in edge comput-ing, Service Oriented Computing and Applications 17 (1) (2023) 25–37. [12] R. Singh, S. S. Gill, Edge ai: a survey, Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 3 (2023) 71–92. [13] A. Choudhury, M. Ghose, A. Islam, et al., Machine learning-based computation offloading in multi-access edge computing: A survey, Journal of Systems Architecture 148 (2024) 103090. [14] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, L.-C. Chen, Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 4510–4520. [15] F. N. Iandola, S. Han, M. W. Moskewicz, K. Ashraf, W. J. Dally, K. Keutzer, SqueezeNet: AlexNet-level accuracy with 50x fewer parameters and< 0.5 MB model size, arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07360 (2016). [16] X. Zhang, X. Zhou, M. Lin, J. Sun, Shufflenet: An extremely efficient convolutional neural network for mobile devices, in: Proceedings of the IEEE con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 6848–6856. [17] D. Vyas, M. d. Prado, T. Verbelen, Towards smart and adaptive agents for active sensing on edge de-vices (Jan. 2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2501.06262. [18] K. S. Velaga, Y. Guo, W. Yu, Edge ai for smart cities: Foundations, challenges, and opportunities, Smart Cities 8 (6) (2025) 211. [19] Y. Hu, Q. Li, Y. Chai, D. Wu, L. Lu, N. Shi, Y. Teng, Y. Zhang, Ai service deploy-ment and resource allocation optimization based on human-like networking architecture, IEEE Inter-net of Things Journal 11 (14) (2024) 24795–24813. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2024.3384546. [20] Y. Xie, Q. Fang, An energy-aware gener-ative ai edge inference framework for low-power iot devices, Electronics 14 (20) (2025). doi:10.3390/electronics14204086. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/14/20/ 4086 

[21] S. D. A. Shah, M. A. Gregory, F. Bouhafs, F. D. Har-tog, Artificial intelligence-defined wireless network-ing for computational offloading and resource alloca-tion in edge computing networks, IEEE Open Jour-nal of the Communications Society 5 (2024) 2039– 2057. doi:10.1109/OJCOMS.2024.3382265. [22] C. K. Dehury, S. Poojara, S. N. Srirama, Def-drel: Towards a sustainable serverless func-tions deployment strategy for fog-cloud envi-ronments using deep reinforcement learning, Applied Soft Computing 152 (2024) 111179. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.111179. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S1568494623011973 

[23] P. Nisha, R. Vinay, K. Laad, P. Sasmal, T. Haraki, C. Juyal, M. A. Gabir Elbakri, A. Acharyya, Run-time prevention of thermal throttling on the edge using reinforcement-learning based predictive thermal aware power and performance manage-ment, in: 2024 22nd IEEE Interregional NEW-CAS Conference (NEWCAS), 2024, pp. 273–277. doi:10.1109/NewCAS58973.2024.10666109. [24] B. Sedlak, P. Raith, A. Morichetta, V. C. Pu-jol, S. Dustdar, Multi-Dimensional Autoscaling of Stream Processing Services on Edge Devices (Oct. 2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2510.06882. [25] O. Pandith, M. K. Pandit, A. Gujarati, A. Mehta, R. Sen, Iceedge: Thermal-aware machine learn-ing inference serving for emerging edge appli-cations, ACM Trans. Sen. Netw. (Mar. 2026). doi:10.1145/3801093. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3801093 

23 [26] A. Mazloomi, H. Sami, J. Bentahar, H. Otrok, A. Mourad, Reinforcement learning framework for server placement and workload allocation in multiaccess edge computing, IEEE Internet of Things Journal 10 (2) (2023) 1376–1390. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2022.3205051. [27] C. K. Dehury, S. N. Srirama, An efficient service dispersal mechanism for fog and cloud computing using deep reinforcement learning, in: 2020 20th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGRID), 2020, pp. 589–598. doi:10.1109/CCGrid49817.2020.00-34. [28] Y. Chang, R. Thompson, C. Hixenbaugh, Tiny long-short term memory model for resource-constrained prediction of battery cycle life, in: G. Nicosia, V. Ojha, S. Giesselbach, M. P. Pardalos, R. Umeton (Eds.), Machine Learning, Optimization, and Data Science, Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, 2025, pp. 131–144. [29] A. Albanese, M. Nardello, D. Brunelli, Automated Pest Detection With DNN on the Edge for Preci-sion Agriculture, IEEE Journal on Emerging and Se-lected Topics in Circuits and Systems 11 (3) (2021) 458–467, conference Name: IEEE Journal on Emerg-ing and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems. doi:10.1109/JETCAS.2021.3101740. [30] D. Aghi, S. Cerrato, V. Mazzia, M. Chiaberge, Deep Semantic Segmentation at the Edge for Autonomous Navigation in Vineyard Rows, in: 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2021, pp. 3421–3428, iSSN: 2153-0866. doi:10.1109/IROS51168.2021.9635969. [31] P. Radanliev, D. De Roure, K. Page, J. R. C. Nurse, R. Mantilla Montalvo, O. Santos, L. Maddox, P. Burnap, Cyber risk at the edge: current and future trends on cyber risk analytics and artificial intelligence in the industrial internet of things and industry 4.0 supply chains, Cybersecurity 3 (1) (2020) 13. doi:10.1186/s42400-020-00052-8. URL https://doi.org/10.1186/ s42400-020-00052-8 

[32] S. N. Srirama, Fog computing and large language models: A vision for mutual beneficiaries, IEEE Computer (2026). doi:10.1109/MC.2026.3708686. [33] B. Sedlak, A. Morichetta, Y. Wang, Y. Fei, L. Wang, S. Dustdar, X. Qu, SLO-Aware Task Of-floading Within Collaborative Vehicle Platoons, in: W. Gaaloul, M. Sheng, Q. Yu, S. Yangui (Eds.), Service-Oriented Computing, Springer Nature, Sin-gapore, 2024, pp. 72–86. [34] C. Qiu, X. Wang, H. Yao, Z. Xiong, F. R. Yu, V. C. M. Leung, Bring Intelligence among Edges: A Blockchain-Assisted Edge Intelligence Approach, in: GLOBECOM 2020 - 2020 IEEE Global Communi-cations Conference, 2020, pp. 1–6, iSSN: 2576-6813. doi:10.1109/GLOBECOM42002.2020.9348271. [35] T. Rausch, S. Dustdar, Edge Intelligence: The Convergence of Humans, Things, and AI, in: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), 2019, pp. 86–96. doi:10.1109/IC2E.2019.00022. [36] G. Plastiras, M. Terzi, C. Kyrkou, T. Theocharidcs, Edge Intelligence: Challenges and Opportunities of Near-Sensor Machine Learning Applications, in: 2018 IEEE 29th International Conference on Application-specific Systems, Architectures and Pro-cessors (ASAP), 2018, pp. 1–7, iSSN: 2160-052X. doi:10.1109/ASAP.2018.8445118. [37] E. Peltonen, M. Bennis, M. Capobianco, M. Deb-bah, A. Ding, F. Gil-Castiñeira, M. Jurmu, T. Kar-vonen, M. Kelanti, A. Kliks, T. Leppänen, L. Lovén, T. Mikkonen, A. Rao, S. Samarakoon, K. Seppänen, P. Sroka, S. Tarkoma, T. Yang, 6G White Paper on Edge Intelligence, arXiv:2004.14850 [cs] (Apr. 2020). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2004.14850. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14850 

[38] D. N. Molokomme, A. J. Onumanyi, A. M. Abu-Mahfouz, Edge Intelligence in Smart Grids: A Sur-vey on Architectures, Offloading Models, Cyber Se-curity Measures, and Challenges, Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks 11 (3) (2022) 47, number: 3 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing In-stitute. doi:10.3390/jsan11030047. URL https://www.mdpi.com/2224-2708/11/3/47 

[39] B. Parekh, K. Amin, Edge Intelligence: A Robust Reinforcement of Edge Computing and Artificial In-telligence, in: P. K. Singh, Z. Polkowski, S. Tan-war, S. K. Pandey, G. Matei, D. Pirvu (Eds.), In-novations in Information and Communication Tech-nologies (IICT-2020), Advances in Science, Technol-ogy & Innovation, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2021, pp. 461–468. [40] B. Sedlak, I. Murturi, P. K. Donta, S. Dust-dar, A Privacy Enforcing Framework for Trans-forming Data Streams on the Edge, IEEE Trans-actions on Emerging Topics in Computing (2023). doi:10.1109/TETC.2023.3315131. [41] P. Thakur, S. Goel, E. Puthooran, Edge ai enabled iot framework for secure smart home infrastructure, Procedia Computer Science 235 (2024) 3369–3378. [42] C. Savaglio, P. Mazzei, G. Fortino, Edge intelligence for industrial iot: Opportunities and limitations, Procedia Computer Science 232 (2024) 397–405. 24 [43] T. Shen, L. Zhang, R. Geng, S. Li, B. Sun, Traf-fic prediction for diverse edge iot data using graph network, Journal of Cloud Computing 13 (1) (2024) 84. [44] W. Qi, Q. Li, Q. Song, L. Guo, A. Jamalipour, Extensive edge intelligence for future vehicular net-works in 6g, IEEE Wireless Communications 28 (4) (2021) 128–135. [45] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, B. A. y Arcas, Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data, in: Artifi-cial intelligence and statistics, Pmlr, 2017, pp. 1273– 1282. [46] Y. Li, X. Wang, R. Zeng, P. K. Donta, I. Murturi, M. Huang, S. Dustdar, Federated domain general-ization: A survey, Proceedings of the IEEE (2025). [47] C. K. Dehury, P. K. Donta, S. Dustdar, S. N. Sri-rama, CCEI-IoT: Clustered and cohesive edge intel-ligence in Internet of Things, in: 2022 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Edge Computing and Com-munications (EDGE), IEEE, 2022, pp. 33–40. [48] M. Silva, T. Gomes, M. Ekpanyapong, A. Tavares, S. Pinto, Chameliot: A tightly-and loosely-coupled hardware-assisted os framework for low-end iot de-vices, Real-Time Systems 60 (1) (2024) 150–196. [49] R. Chan, W. K. Yan, J. M. Ma, K. M. Loh, T. Yu, M. Y. H. Low, K. P. Yar, H. Rehman, T. C. Phua, Iot devices deployment challenges and studies in build-ing management system, Frontiers in the Internet of Things 2 (2023) 1254160. [50] J. Höglund, S. Bouget, M. Furuhed, J. Preuß Matts-son, G. Selander, S. Raza, Autopki: public key in-frastructure for iot with automated trust transfer, International Journal of Information Security 23 (3) (2024) 1859–1875. [51] M. Pathak, K. N. Mishra, S. P. Singh, Securing data and preserving privacy in cloud iot-based technolo-gies an analysis of assessing threats and develop-ing effective safeguard, Artificial intelligence review 57 (10) (2024) 269. [52] O. Dib, Communication-efficient agentic edge intelligence: A survey of federated multi-agent information fusion for llm-driven edge ai, Information Fusion 136 (2026) 104577. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2026.104577. [53] S. Wagner, F. Deissenboeck, Abstractness, speci-ficity, and complexity in software design, in: Pro-ceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on the Role of Abstraction in Software Engineering, 2008, pp. 35–42. [54] G. Simmann, V. Veeranna, R. Kriesten, Design of an alternative hardware abstraction layer for embed-ded systems with time-controlled hardware access, in: 2024 Stuttgart International Symposium, SAE Technical Paper, 2024. [55] A. Lercher, J. Glock, C. Macho, M. Pinzger, Mi-croservice api evolution in practice: A study on strategies and challenges, Journal of Systems and Software 215 (2024) 112110. [56] I. Bartolini, M. Patella, A stream processing ab-straction framework, Frontiers in Big Data 6 (2023) 1227156. [57] M. Silva, J. Santos, M. Curado, The path towards virtualized wireless communications: A survey and research challenges, Journal of Network and Systems Management 32 (1) (2024) 12. [58] P. Krishnan, K. Jain, A. Aldweesh, P. Prabu, R. Buyya, Openstackdp: a scalable network security framework for sdn-based openstack cloud infrastruc-ture, Journal of Cloud Computing 12 (1) (2023) 26. [59] W. R. Cook, On understanding data abstraction, re-visited, in: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object oriented programming systems languages and applications, 2009, pp. 557–572. [60] M. Shirali, M. F. Sani, Z. Ahmadi, E. Serral, Llm-based event abstraction and integration for iot-sourced logs, in: International Conference on Busi-ness Process Management, Springer, 2024, pp. 138– 149. [61] E. Villagrossi, M. Delledonne, M. Faroni, M. Beschi, N. Pedrocchi, Hiding task-oriented programming complexity: an industrial case study, Interna-tional Journal of Computer Integrated Manufactur-ing 36 (11) (2023) 1629–1648. [62] L. Kong, J. Tan, J. Huang, G. Chen, S. Wang, X. Jin, P. Zeng, M. Khan, S. K. Das, Edge-computing-driven internet of things: A survey, ACM computing surveys 55 (8) (2022) 1–41. [63] A. Hogan, E. Blomqvist, M. Cochez, C. d’Amato, G. D. Melo, C. Gutierrez, S. Kirrane, J. E. L. Gayo, R. Navigli, S. Neumaier, et al., Knowledge graphs, ACM Computing Surveys (Csur) 54 (4) (2021) 1–37. [64] C. K. Dehury, S. N. Srirama, Mastering DevOps: A Cloud Engineering and Data Science Perspective, Morgan Kaufmann, 2026. doi: https://doi.org/ 10.1016/C2025-0-00512-4 .[65] A. Dauda, O. Flauzac, F. Nolot, A survey on iot ap-plication architectures, Sensors 24 (16) (2024) 5320. 25 [66] T. F. D. B. Sarasola, A. García, J. L. Ferrando, Iiot protocols for edge/fog and cloud computing in indus-trial ai: A high frequency perspective, International Journal of Cloud Applications and Computing (IJ-CAC) 14 (1) (2024) 1–30. [67] A. Lazidis, K. Tsakos, E. G. Petrakis, Publish– subscribe approaches for the iot and the cloud: Func-tional and performance evaluation of open-source systems, Internet of Things 19 (2022) 100538. [68] R. Gupta, D. Reebadiya, S. Tanwar, 6g-enabled edge intelligence for ultra-reliable low latency applica-tions: Vision and mission, Computer Standards & Interfaces 77 (2021) 103521. [69] K. Huang, Q. Lan, Z. Liu, L. Yang, Semantic data sourcing for 6g edge intelligence, IEEE Communica-tions Magazine 61 (12) (2023) 70–76. [70] I. Murturi, C. Avasalcai, C. Tsigkanos, S. Dust-dar, Edge-to-edge resource discovery using metadata replication, in: 2019 IEEE 3rd International Confer-ence on Fog and Edge Computing (ICFEC), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6. [71] I. Murturi, S. Dustdar, A Decentralized Approach for Resource Discovery using Metadata Replication in Edge Networks, IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 15 (5) (2022) 2526–2537. [72] N. Dragoni, S. Giallorenzo, A. L. Lafuente, M. Maz-zara, F. Montesi, R. Mustafin, L. Safina, Microser-vices: yesterday, today, and tomorrow, Present and ulterior software engineering (2017) 195–216. [73] B. Burns, B. Grant, D. Oppenheimer, E. Brewer, J. Wilkes, Borg, omega, and kubernetes, Communi-cations of the ACM 59 (5) (2016) 50–57. [74] S. E. Czerwinski, B. Y. Zhao, T. D. Hodes, A. D. Joseph, R. H. Katz, An architecture for a secure service discovery service, in: Proceed-ings of the 5th annual ACM/IEEE international conference on Mobile computing and networking, ACM, Seattle Washington USA, 1999, pp. 24–35. doi:10.1145/313451.313462. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/313451. 313462 

[75] O. Hayat, R. Ngah, S. Z. Mohd Hashim, M. H. Dahri, R. Firsandaya Malik, Y. Rahayu, Device Dis-covery in D2D Communication: A Survey, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 131114–131134, conference Name: IEEE Access. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2941138. [76] F. Baccelli, N. Khude, R. Laroia, J. Li, T. Richard-son, S. Shakkottai, S. Tavildar, X. Wu, On the design of device-to-device autonomous discov-ery, in: 2012 Fourth International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (COM-SNETS 2012), 2012, pp. 1–9, iSSN: 2155-2509. doi:10.1109/COMSNETS.2012.6151335. [77] P. C. Ccori, L. C. C. De Biase, M. K. Zuffo, F. S. C. da Silva, Device discovery strategies for the IoT, in: 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Consumer Electronics (ISCE), 2016, pp. 97–98, iSSN: 2159-1423. doi:10.1109/ISCE.2016.7797388. [78] Z. Beerliova, F. Eberhard, T. Erlebach, A. Hall, M. Hoffmann, M. Mihal’ak, L. S. Ram, Network Dis-covery and Verification, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 24 (12) (2006) 2168–2181, conference Name: IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. doi:10.1109/JSAC.2006.884015. [79] R. I. Ansari, C. Chrysostomou, S. A. Hassan, M. Guizani, S. Mumtaz, J. Rodriguez, J. J. P. C. Ro-drigues, 5G D2D Networks: Techniques, Challenges, and Future Prospects, IEEE Systems Journal 12 (4) (2018) 3970–3984, conference Name: IEEE Systems Journal. doi:10.1109/JSYST.2017.2773633. [80] J. Kosińska, B. Baliś, M. Konieczny, M. Malawski, S. Zieliński, Toward the observability of cloud-native applications: The overview of the state-of-the-art, IEEE Access 11 (2023) 73036–73052. [81] U. Faseeha, H. J. Syed, F. Samad, S. Zehra, H. Ahmed, Observability in microservices: An in-depth exploration of frameworks, challenges, and de-ployment paradigms, IEEE Access 13 (2025) 72011– 72039. [82] B. Li, X. Peng, Q. Xiang, H. Wang, T. Xie, J. Sun, X. Liu, Enjoy your observability: an industrial sur-vey of microservice tracing and analysis, Empirical Software Engineering 27 (1) (2022) 25. [83] F. Gomes, P. Rego, F. Trinta, A systematic map-ping study on observability of microservices-based applications: fundamentals, classifications, and chal-lenges, Computing 107 (9) (2025) 183. [84] B. Costa, A. Banerjee, P. P. Jayaraman, L. R. Car-valho, J. Bachiega Jr, A. Araujo, Achieving observ-ability on fog computing with the use of open-source tools, in: International conference on mobile and ubiquitous systems: computing, networking, and services, Springer, 2023, pp. 319–340. [85] V. C. Pujol, P. K. Donta, A. Morichetta, I. Murturi, S. Dustdar, Edge intelligence—research opportuni-ties for distributed computing continuum systems, IEEE Internet Computing 27 (4) (2023) 53–74. [86] B. Sedlak, V. C. Pujol, I. M. de Abril, P. K. Donta, A. N. Toosi, S. Dustdar, Service Orchestration in the Computing Continuum: Structural Challenges 26 and Vision, IEEE Internet Computing 30 (2) (2026) 88–98. doi:10.1109/MIC.2026.3662064. [87] S. Amgothu, A. K. Vedantham, S. P. M. Gowda, Observability and aiops in cloud-scale devops: Technologies, architectures, challenges, and future trends, in: 2025 38th Conference of Open Innova-tions Association (FRUCT), IEEE, 2025, pp. 12–20. [88] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, S. Addepalli, Fog com-puting and its role in the internet of things, in: Pro-ceedings of the first edition of the MCC workshop on Mobile cloud computing, 2012, pp. 13–16. [89] Z. Zhou, X. Chen, E. Li, L. Zeng, K. Luo, J. Zhang, Edge intelligence: Paving the last mile of artificial intelligence with edge computing, Proceedings of the IEEE 107 (8) (2019) 1738–1762. [90] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu, et al., A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise, in: kdd, Vol. 96, 1996, pp. 226–231. [91] T. Zhang, R. Ramakrishnan, M. Livny, Birch: an efficient data clustering method for very large databases, ACM sigmod record 25 (2) (1996) 103– 114. [92] C. K. Dehury, S. N. Srirama, P. K. Donta, S. Dustdar, Securing clustered edge intelligence with blockchain, IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 13 (1) (2024) 22–29. [93] A. Carvalho, N. O. Mahony, L. Krpalkova, S. Campbell, J. Walsh, P. Doody, At the edge of industry 4.0, Procedia Computer Science 155 (2019) 276–281, the 16th International Confer-ence on Mobile Systems and Pervasive Com-puting (MobiSPC 2019),The 14th International Conference on Future Networks and Communi-cations (FNC-2019),The 9th International Confer-ence on Sustainable Energy Information Technology. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.08.039. [94] M. Trigka, E. Dritsas, Edge and cloud comput-ing in smart cities, Future Internet 17 (3) (2025). doi:10.3390/fi17030118. [95] M. U. Tariq, S. M. Saqib, T. Mazhar, M. A. Khan, T. Shahzad, H. Hamam, Edge-enabled smart agriculture framework: Integrating iot, lightweight deep learning, and agentic ai for context-aware farming, Results in Engineering 28 (2025) 107342. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2025.107342. [96] Y. Zhang, C. Jiang, B. Yue, J. Wan, M. Guizani, Information fusion for edge intelligence: A survey, Information Fusion 81 (2022) 171–186. [97] H. S. Khargharia, A. Ouali, S. Shakya, S. Ah-mad, Collision avoidance in uav swarms: Alearning-centric perspective on collaborative in-telligence, Neurocomputing 663 (2026) 132020. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2025.132020. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S092523122502692X 

[98] J. Zhang, Y. Hu, M. Shao, Y. Tang, L. Wang, X. Li, Learning enhanced scheduling and resource alloca-tion for heterogeneous uav swarms in edge assisted remote sensing, Scientific Reports (2026). [99] S. Deng, H. Zhao, W. Fang, J. Yin, S. Dust-dar, A. Y. Zomaya, Edge Intelligence: The Con-fluence of Edge Computing and Artificial Intelli-gence, IEEE Internet of Things Journal (Aug. 2020). doi:10.1109/JIOT.2020.2984887. [100] D. Xu, T. Li, Y. Li, X. Su, S. Tarkoma, T. Jiang, J. Crowcroft, P. Hui, Edge Intelligence: Archi-tectures, Challenges, and Applications, number: arXiv:2003.12172 arXiv:2003.12172 [cs] (Jun. 2020). URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.12172 

[101] J. Chen, X. Ran, Deep Learning With Edge Computing: A Review, Proceedings of the IEEE 107 (8) (2019) 1655–1674. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2019.2921977. [102] S. S. Gill, M. Golec, J. Hu, M. Xu, J. Du, H. Wu, G. K. Walia, S. S. Murugesan, B. Ali, M. Kumar, et al., Edge ai: A taxonomy, systematic review and future directions, Cluster Computing 28 (1) (2025) 18. [103] D. Stadnicka, J. Sęp, R. Amadio, D. Mazzei, M. Ty-rovolas, C. Stylios, A. Carreras-Coch, J. A. Merino, T. Żabiński, J. Navarro, Industrial Needs in the Fields of Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things and Edge Computing, Sensors 22 (12) (2022) 4501, number: 12 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. doi:10.3390/s22124501. URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/12/ 4501 

[104] A. Haller, K. Janowicz, S. J. Cox, M. Lefrançois, K. Taylor, D. Le Phuoc, J. Lieberman, R. García-Castro, R. Atkinson, C. Stadler, The modular SSN ontology: A joint W3C and OGC standard specify-ing the semantics of sensors, observations, sampling, and actuation, Semantic Web 10 (1) (2019) 9–32. doi:10.3233/SW-180320. [105] W. Li, G. Tropea, A. Abid, A. Detti, F. Le Gall, Re-view of Standard Ontologies for the Web of Things, in: 2019 Global IoT Summit (GIoTS), 2019, pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/GIOTS.2019.8766377. 27 [106] R. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Xu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Y. Li, S. Mao, S. Sun, X. Shen, D. I. Kim, Toward Edge General Intelligence with Agentic AI and Agentification: Concepts, Technolo-gies, and Future Directions, arXiv:2508.18725 [cs.NI] (Aug. 2025). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2508.18725. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.18725 

[107] F. R. Mughal, J. He, B. Das, F. A. Dharejo, N. Zhu, S. B. Khan, S. Alzahrani, Adaptive federated learn-ing for resource-constrained iot devices through edge intelligence and multi-edge clustering, Scientific Re-ports 14 (1) (2024) 28746. [108] Y. Zhang, C. Jiang, B. Yue, J. Wan, M. Guizani, Information fusion for edge intelligence: Asurvey, Information Fusion 81 (2022) 171–186. doi:10.1016/j.inffus.2021.11.018. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S1566253521002438 

28