Title: Neuro-Symbolic Participation Governance for Verifiable AI Agents in Open Digital Twin Ecosystems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.00937v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 01:01:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# Neuro-Symbolic Participation Governance for Verifiable AI Agents in Open Digital Twin Ecosystems 

Juan Li 1, Wei Cai 2 and Yan Bai 2

Abstract — Autonomous AI agents, increasingly empowered by large language models, are becoming important components of human-machine systems for high-stakes decision support in digital twin ecosystems. However, existing multi-agent systems often lack robust verification for identity, capability, and policy compliance, especially in decentralized environments spanning multiple institutions. This paper proposes a neuro-symbolic decentralized governance framework for verifiable agents in collaborative digital twin environments. By representing agents through multi-layer semantic profiles, the framework bridges probabilistic neural reasoning with deterministic institutional governance, thereby supporting trustworthy human-AI col-laboration and meaningful human oversight. Capabilities are grounded in formal domain ontologies to enable machine-interpretable, policy-aware, and context-sensitive participation. These credentials, issued by organizational authorities, are vali-dated via blockchain-based smart contracts, ensuring auditable participation without exposing sensitive data. We demonstrate the framework using a decision-support prototype with clinic, digital twin, and wearable provider agents effectively prevents unauthorized interaction and enforces institutional policies with manageable overhead. Our findings suggest that neuro-symbolic decentralized governance provides a scalable and trustworthy pathway for safe human-machine collaboration across institutional boundaries. 

I. INTRODUCTION Autonomous AI agents, increasingly empowered by large language models (LLMs) capable of complex reasoning and tool interaction, are becoming integral to modern decision-support and human-machine systems [1]. In intelligent environments such as Digital Twin (DT) ecosystems [ 2], these agents must collaborate across organizational boundaries to in-tegrate complementary capabilities. For example, a DT agent for clinical simulation may rely on a Clinic Agent for real-time data and a Wearable Provider Agent for physiological metrics to produce predictive insights. Unlike conventional sensing agents, DT agents embed reasoning models that directly influence downstream outcomes, requiring rigorous guarantees of identity, semantic competence, and policy alignment. From a human-machine systems perspective, the core challenge is not only enabling autonomous coordination among agents, but  

> *This work was partially supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) with award number 2334197, 2218046, 1921576 and 2334196.
> 1Juan Li is with Department of Computer Science at North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND, USA.

J.Li@ndsu.edu  

> 2Wei Cai and Yan Bai are with the School of Engineering and Technology, University of Washington, Tacoma, WA, 98402, USA.

{weicaics, yanb }@uw.edu 

> © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

also ensuring that human stakeholders can trust, supervise, and audit agent-mediated decisions in safety-critical workflows. The full potential of collaborative AI agents is constrained by the decentralized nature of open environments. These ecosystems involve heterogeneous stakeholders operating under distinct governance structures, the absence of auniversal central authority trusted to manage identities or enforce policies across institutions, and dynamic participation 

as agents frequently enter and leave workflows. In high-stakes domains, especially healthcare, implicit trust and static access rules are inadequate. Unverified agents may introduce biased models or operate outside regulatory constraints, while centralized coordination creates single points of failure, reduces institutional autonomy, and limits transparency in col-laborative decision-making. As multi-agent ecosystems grow, collaboration must rely on governance, not assumed trust, using verifiable identity, expertise, and policy compliance. To address these limitations, we propose a neuro-symbolic decentralized governance framework for verifiable AI agents in collaborative DT ecosystems. It bridges the neural rea-soning of modern autonomous agents with the symbolic requirements of formal governance. Each agent is represented through a multi-layer semantic profile that grounds probabilis-tic capabilities in formal domain ontologies (e.g., SNOMED CT), enabling machine-interpretable, policy-aware partici-pation. These capabilities are encoded as cryptographically verifiable credentials (VCs) issued by institutional authorities and validated through a decentralized trust layer implemented with blockchain-based smart contracts. The proposed trust layer supports heterogeneous stakeholders through issuer-bound DIDs and VCs, decentralized on-chain validation, and dynamic participation via time-bounded credentials, revocation, and session logging. This approach authorizes and audits participation without exposing sensitive internal data, transforming collaboration into a structured and accountable process. Therefore, decentralized governance serves as the interface layer that keeps autonomous machine agents aligned with institutionally defined human objectives, responsibilities, and oversight requirements. Our primary contributions are three-fold. First, we develop neuro-symbolic agent profiles that model agents through identity, functional capability, and operational constraints, thereby integrating high-level neural intelligence with sym-bolic guardrails. Second, we propose a knowledge-centric verification approach that grounds agent capabilities in domain-specific Knowledge Graphs and formal ontologies, enabling agents to prove semantic competence rather than merely asserting roles. Third, we implement a decentralized arXiv:2608.00937v1 [cs.CR] 2 Aug 2026 governance infrastructure based on a blockchain registry and policy engine that validates credentials and records interactions, providing a scalable and tamper-resistant audit trail for collaborative workflows. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Trust in Multi-Agent Systems 

Trust management in open multi-agent systems (MAS) has relied on reputation and behavioral models to estimate reliability through past interactions [ 3], [ 4], [ 5]. While these approaches effectively identify malicious actors over time, they lack mechanisms to verify whether an agent possesses the semantic qualifications or institutional authorization required for a specific task. Recent large language model (LLM)-based agent frameworks, such as AutoGen [ 6 ], demonstrate sophis-ticated autonomous coordination but offer limited guardrails for formal policy compliance or expertise verification [ 7]. Our work addresses this gap by shifting from behavioral estimation to credential-based participation governance. 

B. Decentralized Identity and Verifiable Credentials 

Decentralized identity provides a foundation for verifiable participation by enabling entities to prove attributes without centralized providers. The W3C standards for Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) [ 8 ] and Verifiable Credentials (VCs) [ 9] es-tablish a cryptographic framework for cross-institutional trust. While frameworks like SAFE [ 10 ] and various blockchain-based models [ 11 ], [ 12 ] have successfully implemented credential-based authorization in distributed systems, they typically focus on identity or static attributes. Our framework extends these standards by incorporating ontology-grounded capability subgraphs into the credential structure, enabling the verification of semantic competence alongside identity. 

C. Neuro-Symbolic AI and Knowledge-Grounded Agents 

The integration of neural learning with symbolic reasoning has emerged as a crucial paradigm for improving AI reliability and explainability [13], [14]. Knowledge graphs and formal ontologies further support this integration by providing structured representations for complex domain reasoning [ 15 ]. However, most existing neuro-symbolic approaches focus on enhancing the internal reasoning of individual models rather than governing the collaborative interactions among multiple agents. In contrast, our framework employs neuro-symbolic semantic profiles as machine-verifiable representations to enforce participation constraints in open ecosystems. 

D. Digital Twin Ecosystems and Agent Collaboration 

Digital twin ecosystems increasingly rely on distributed agents to integrate heterogeneous data and predictive models across functional boundaries [ 16 ], [ 17 ]. Prior research has explored agent-based coordination for healthcare digital twins [ 18 ] and proposed general multi-agent architectures for digital twin synchronization [ 19 ]. Nevertheless, existing studies prioritize interoperability and data modeling over the verification of agent trustworthiness and expertise. We address this limitation by introducing a decentralized governance layer that ensures only authorized and semantically qualified agents can participate in collaborative digital twin workflows. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. System Architecture  

> Fig. 1. Decentralized governance architecture for verifiable multi-agent collaboration integrating AI agents, blockchain-based trust infrastructure, and human policy authorities.

The proposed framework enables verifiable multi-agent collaboration through a decentralized governance model that integrates human oversight with machine-verifiable partici-pation. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the system consists of three interacting layers: the Participant AI Agents Layer , where LLM-empowered agents collaborate on decision tasks; the 

Decentralized Trust Layer , which manages identity and policy enforcement via blockchain; and the External Governance Layer , where authorities define policies and maintain domain ontologies. We formalize a governed collaboration session as a quadruple C =< A, R, P, L > , where A is the set of participating agents, R denotes assigned roles, P represents the governing policies, and L is the decentralized ledger for auditability. Participation is permitted only when an agent’s credentials satisfy the specific task constraints, such that 

Verify (Ai, R j , P k) = True , where 

Verify (Ai, R j , P k) := ValidReg (Ai) ∧ CapMatch (Ai, R j )

∧ PolicyMatch (Ai, P k).

Here, ValidReg (Ai) checks issuer authorization, credential sta-tus, and temporal validity; CapMatch (Ai, R j ) checks whether the agent’s ontology-grounded capability claim subsumes the role requirement; and PolicyMatch (Ai, P k) checks that the submitted policy constraints equal the registered policy commitment and satisfy the task policy. It is also fail-closed under revocation because each authorization request and each interaction-log append re-evaluates registry validity on-chain. In deployment, the propagation bound is one new block plus the inclusion delay of the next transaction. We treat Verify 

as an admission-control predicate, not as a guarantee over the downstream clinical recommendation itself; output-level assurance is left to future work. B. Verifiable Agent Profile and Credential Mapping 

Each agent Ai is represented by a multi-layer neuro-symbolic profile Si = ⟨I i, Ci, Pi⟩ encoded as a W3C-compliant Verifiable Credential (VC). The profile is neuro-symbolic because it binds learned or data-driven agent competence to explicit symbolic commitments that can be checked deterministically. The identity layer Ii links the agent to its authority through a Decentralized Identifier (DID) and provenance chain, enabling on-chain origin verification and spoofing protection. The capability layer Ci captures the agent’s neural or statistical function, such as prediction, simulation, or time-series interpretation, as a subgraph Gi ⊆ O 

of a domain ontology O (e.g., SNOMED CT). For efficiency, a capabilityHash is computed as Keccak-256 over the canonicalized, sorted subgraph representation to provide a compact on-chain fingerprint. The policy layer Pi specifies symbolic governance constraints Φi (e.g., HIPAA compliance) and temporal bounds ( validFrom /validUntil ), which map to the smart contract’s expiresAt validation and status checks for real-time participation control. A policyHash 

is anchored on-chain to verify compliance without exposing full subgraphs. The resulting VC therefore ties a learned agent’s functional claim to ontology-grounded roles and institutional rules inside a single cryptographically signed object, as illustrated below. 

Example VC Payload for a Clinic Agent                   

> {"@context": ["https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1", "https://schema.org/AgentOntology"], "type": ["VerifiableCredential"," AgentParticipationCredential"], "issuer": "did:ethr:0xHospitalAuthority...", "credentialSubject": {"id": "did:ethr:0xClinicAgent...", "identityLayer": {"organizationDID": "did:ethr:0xHospitalX...", "provenanceChain": ["TrainingRegistry:v2.1", "ClinicalBoard:Approval:2024-03"] }, "capabilityLayer": {"ontologyRef": "snomed:Diabetes_Risk_Prediction", "knowledgeSources": ["SNOMED-CT:73211009","LOINC :2345-7"], "capabilityHash": "keccak256( serialized_capability_subgraph)" }, "policyLayer": {"constraints": [{"rule":"DataPrivacy","standard":"HIPAA", "status":"validated"}, {"rule":"ConsentRequired","scope":"PatientData", "enforcement":"strict"}, {"rule":"TemporalBound","validFrom":"2024-01-01", "validUntil":"2025-12-31"} ]}}, "proof": {"type": "EcdsaSecp256k1Signature2019", "verificationMethod": "did:ethr:0xHospitalAuthority...# key-1", "proofValue": "0x..." }}

1) On-Chain vs. Off-Chain Management: To preserve privacy while ensuring verifiability, the framework adopts a hybrid storage architecture. Sensitive agent data remains off-chain in distributed storage such as IPFS, including full VC payloads with detailed capability descriptions, policy specifications, raw knowledge graph subgraphs, training provenance records, and organizational metadata. Conversely, only cryptographic anchors and logic-critical pointers are registered on the smart contract registry. This on-chain data includes the agent DID-to-record mapping, containing Keccak-256 fingerprints of the canonicalized capability and policy subgraphs. To enable real-time participation control, the registry also maintains the credential lifecycle status (e.g., Active , Suspended , Revoked ), temporal validity timestamps ( issuedAt and expiresAt ), and authorized issuer registry with associated revocation lists. This separation ensures that the blockchain serves as a verification anchor rather than a data store, allowing any verifier to confirm credential integrity without accessing the underlying sensitive data. For experimental efficiency, the on-chain fingerprints (capabilityHash and policyHash ) are computed over canonicalized, sorted representations of the respective ontol-ogy class names extracted from the VC payload. 

2) Smart Contract Validation Logic: The governance layer is implemented as a set of interconnected Solidity smart contracts deployed on an EVM-compatible blockchain. These contracts describe specific functions that process participation requests by comparing agent credentials against the symbolic policy nodes in the registry, as shown below: 

AgentRegistry Contract                                                                             

> contract AgentRegistry {struct AgentRecord {bytes32 capabilityHash; // H(G_i)
> bytes32 policyHash; // H(Phi_i)
> address issuer; uint256 expiresAt; CredentialStatus status; }mapping(address => AgentRecord) public agents; mapping(address => bool) public authorizedIssuers; function registerAgent(address agentDID, bytes32 cap, bytes32 policy, uint256 expiry) external onlyAuthorizedIssuer {agents[agentDID] =AgentRecord({ capabilityHash: cap, policyHash: policy, issuer: msg.sender, expiresAt: expiry, status: CredentialStatus.Active }); }function verifyAgent(address agentDID) public view returns (bool) {AgentRecord memory record =agents[agentDID];
> return record.status == CredentialStatus.Active && block.timestamp <= record.expiresAt && authorizedIssuers[record.issuer]; }function revokeCredential(address agentDID) external onlyAuthorizedIssuer {//... }
> function suspendCredential(address agentDID) external onlyAuthorizedIssuer {//... }
> function getAgentRecord(address agentDID) external view returns (AgentRecord memory) {//... }
> }

GovernancePolicy Contract                                                  

> contract GovernancePolicy {struct Policy {bytes32 requiredCapabilityHash;
> // ... [other task constraints]
> }
> // ... [state variables and policy registry]
> function authorizeRole(address agentDID, bytes32 taskId, bytes32 capHash, bytes32 policyHash, bytes32 roleId, bytes32 sessionToken, uint256 expiry) external {require(registry.verifyAgent(agentDID), "Identity invalid"); AgentRegistry.AgentRecord memory record =registry. getAgentRecord(agentDID); require(capHash == record.capabilityHash, "Cap hash mismatch"); require(policyHash == record.policyHash, "Policy hash mismatch");
> // ... [task-specific policy matching and binding]
> emit AccessGranted(agentDID, taskId, sessionToken, expiry); }}

AgentRegistry contract 1 serves as the primary identity anchor, managing agent registration and providing real-time status and temporal validity verification. The GovernancePol-icy contract 2 acts as the enforcement engine, ensuring that agents satisfy both semantic capability and institutional policy requirements before granting conditional access. 

C. Collaboration Governance Workflow 1) Participation Lifecycle: The lifecycle of an agent joining a governed collaboration task consists of five sequential phases. Initially, in Phase 1 (Participation Request) , an agent submits its DID, the target task identifier, and the off-chain location (e.g., IPFS CID) of its full Verifiable Credential to the governance smart contract. Subsequently, in Phase 2 (Credential Retrieval and Hash Verification) , the trust layer retrieves the off-chain VC, computes a Keccak-256 hash over the payload, and compares it against the on-chain fingerprints in the AgentRegistry to ensure integrity. In Phase 3 (Off-chain Capability Reasoning) , the trust layer resolves the agent’s full capability subgraph from the VC against the domain ontology using an OWL reasoner (e.g., HermiT). This enables flexible matching by verifying whether the agent’s specific semantic skills subsume the required task roles, such as a Clinical Risk Assessor. Unlike rigid on-chain checks, this off-chain reasoning leverages the ontology’s expressive power, while on-chain hashes remain solely for integrity verification. This is followed by Phase 4 (Policy Compliance Verification) , where the policyHash 

is verified against task requirements to enforce constraints such as HIPAA compliance or consent validation. Finally, in Phase 5 (Conditional Access Grant) , the smart contract emits an AccessGranted event and records authorization, issuing a time-bound session token for governed participation. 

2) Dynamic Role Binding: Static role assignment is insufficient for open digital twin ecosystems where task requirements evolve. Our framework implements dynamic role binding through a multi-step inference process. When a task is instantiated, the coordinator queries the representation ontology to determine the required capability set (e.g., SNOMED CT concepts). The trust layer then retrieves the agent’s ontology-grounded capabilities by resolving its 

capabilityHash . An OWL reasoner (e.g., HermiT) then 

> 1Sepolia Contract Address: 0x2a01061c0ab8922b5e1283f053dbb7c63eb77a98
> 2Sepolia Contract Address: 0x38ac7f0d116850e3596eeeaeaf50120eb49bb22d

infers the most specific task role that the agent’s capability subgraph subsumes. For example, an agent covering cardiac risk assessment concepts is bound in real-time to the Clin-ical Risk Assessor role, while an agent with only heart rate monitoring capabilities is assigned a Data Provider 

role with restricted access. This role resolution occurs off-chain to minimize blockchain gas consumption, while the final binding is permanently recorded on-chain via the 

GovernancePolicy contract. 

3) Immutable Interaction Logging: All agent interactions within a governed collaboration session are recorded in an append-only Interaction Log implemented as a smart con-tract 3. To ensure dynamic governance, each log entry requires a real-time validity check via verifyAgent(agentDID) ,preventing revoked or expired agents from contributing further to the task. This immutable ledger provides three critical governance benefits. First, it ensures decision provenance , as every prediction or action produced by an agent can be traced back to its specific inputs, bound roles, and verified credentials at the time of execution. Second, the framework supports 

post-hoc auditability , enabling governance authorities to reconstruct decision chains and verify that each step complied with institutional policies. Finally, the blockchain provides inherent tamper resistance , ensuring that interaction records cannot be retroactively altered, thereby maintaining long-term accountability across institutional boundaries. The combina-tion of credential verification, dynamic role binding, and immutable logging ensures that collaboration in open digital twin ecosystems is governable, auditable, and accountable. IV. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

We evaluate the proposed framework in an ontology-grounded simulation involving three representative agents: a Clinic Agent (ClinicalDataAccess, PatientRecordQuery), a Digital Twin Agent (CardiacRiskAssessment, ECGInter-pretation), and a Wearable Agent (HeartRateMonitoring, ActivityTracking). Each agent is governed by the neuro-symbolic profile and blockchain trust layer defined in Section III. The evaluation focuses on security resilience, dynamic policy enforcement, scalability, and system overhead. 

A. Experimental Setup 

The Agent Representation Ontology is implemented in OWL using Owlready2 and the HermiT reasoner, defining nine capability and four regulatory policy classes. Each agent’s capability and policy subgraphs are serialized, sorted, and hashed via Keccak-256 to produce compact on-chain fingerprints. The decentralized trust layer was evaluated locally on the Hardhat Network using Solidity v0.8.20, while the corresponding contracts were also deployed to the Sepolia testnet for public auditability. We deployed three primary contracts: the AgentRegistry for registration and revocation, the GovernancePolicy for multi-stage role authorization, and the InteractionLog for immutable recording with real-time validity checks. Additionally, a baseline BaselineMAS 4

> 3Sepolia Contract Address: 0x0d6f8f43c3394003b13ccc300c107c890e723038
> 4Sepolia Contract Address: 0x549d33dbeae29a97908c73f405830d31d97ad111

contract with only address-based registration and no semantic or policy verification was deployed to represent the implicit trust models prevalent in existing MAS frameworks. The evaluation uses 42 executable test cases grouped into 14 security tests, 10 dynamic-policy tests, 10 scalability tests, and 8 overhead tests. Table I reports the 11 unique attack scenarios covered by the security suite; the remaining three security tests are control or state-transition checks required to realize expiry, issuer-revocation propagation, and mid-session invalidation on-chain. We report admission outcome, revert reason correctness, false rejection rate, authorization latency, gas per function, and full-session overhead. All 42 test cases were executed on a Linux workstation (AMD Ryzen, 32GB RAM). For cross-chain latency projections, block confirmation times were modeled based on published parameters for Ethereum L1 (12s), Optimism (2s), Base (2s), Arbitrum (0.26s), Polygon PoS (2s), and Solana (0.4s). 

B. Results and Security Analysis 1) Security Scenario: Attack Matrix: To assess resilience, we tested 11 attack scenarios across identity forgery, ca-pability escalation, and policy violations. These 11 cases were selected to cover the minimal but representative threat surface exposed by our architecture: credential lifecycle abuse, semantic capability tampering, issuer-side trust compromise, unauthorized task participation, and logging misuse, thereby spanning the main attack paths that a decentralized clinical DT workflow would face without making the evaluation artificially redundant. As summarized in Table I, our framework achieved a 100% detection rate, whereas the baseline accepted all malicious requests. This result should be interpreted as an executable check of the implemented safety invariants rather than as an end-to-end guarantee of clinical correctness: the mechanism proves that unauthorized or policy-incompatible agents cannot enter the governed workflow, but it does not by itself validate the quality of the model output produced by a legitimately admitted agent. Crucially, the framework provides precise diagnostic revert reasons: “Agent identity invalid” for registry-validity failures (A1–A3, A9); “Capability credential mismatch” for submitted capability claims that conflict with the registered credential (A4, A6–A8); “Policy credential mismatch” for a submitted policy hash that conflicts with the registered credential (A5); “Policy constraint mismatch” when an agent has the required capability but does not satisfy the task policy (A8b); and “Capability mismatch” when an agent’s registered capability does not satisfy the task requirement (A10). This diagnostic capability supports post-hoc forensic analysis of rejected participation attempts. 

2) Dynamic Policy Adaptation: Real-time governance was verified along four dimensions. First, for policy hot updates , the Digital Twin Agent was initially authorized under HIPAA, PatientConsent, and GDPR at T1; after the policy was upgraded to include DataAnonymization ,requests at T2 were immediately rejected, confirming that changes take effect in the next block. Second, credential revocation propagation was validated by revoking one agent via revokeCredential() , after which subsequent                                         

> TABLE I ATTACK MATRIX : D ETECTION RESULTS
> ID Attack Scenario Proposed Baseline
> A1 Unregistered agent Reject Accept A2 Expired credential Reject Accept A3 Revoked issuer Reject Accept A4 Capability impersonation Reject Accept A5 Partial capability match Reject Accept A6 Tampered off-chain VC Reject Accept A7 Replayed old credential Reject Accept A8 Wrong capability & policy Reject Accept A8b Correct cap., wrong policy Reject Accept A9 Temporal expiry mid-session Reject Accept A10 Combined cap. + policy Reject Accept
> Detection Rate 100% 0%

attempts to record interactions in the InteractionLog 

were rejected with “Agent no longer valid.” Removing an authority from the authorizedIssuers registry likewise propagated to all agents it had issued, confirming cascading revocation. Under the current architecture, the worst-case propagation delay is bounded by one newly mined block plus the inclusion of the next authorization or logging transaction. Third, cross-task policy isolation ensured that an agent authorized for Task 1 (diabetes risk assessment) could not participate in Task 2 (cardiac monitoring), even when both tasks coexisted, thereby enforcing capability-based task boundaries. Finally, across 100 consecutive authorization requests from a legitimate agent, the framework yielded a 

zero false rejection rate (0.0%). Interaction logs recorded before a policy update also remained intact and readable, confirming that enforcement is non-retroactive and preserves audit integrity. 

3) Scalability: We measured authorization performance with up to 50 agents. We capped the experiment at 50 agents because this scale realistically reflects cross-institution DT collaboration in our prototype while still permitting repeated end-to-end runs with full logging and policy checks under controlled local conditions. As shown in Table II, gas consumption remains constant at ∼63,000 per call, confirming 

O(1) verification complexity relative to ecosystem size. Per-agent authorization latency, computed as total batch time divided by the number of agents, remained approximately constant over the tested range, with small measurement variation and zero observed failures.                          

> TABLE II SCALABILITY : A UTHORIZATION PERFORMANCE
> Agents Total (ms) Avg/Agent (ms) Avg Gas Failures
> 10 90.9 63,051 020 15 0.8 63,050 030 28 0.9 63,049 040 35 0.9 63,050 050 34 0.7 63,049 0

4) Overhead Analysis: Table III details the gas costs for individual operations. While the framework consumes more gas than the baseline MAS (total gas: 219,726; time: 3 ms for registration and access only) due to the 30 interaction log entries required for auditability (89.5% of total gas), the core registration and authorization operations remain efficient (10.5% of total gas). Table IV summarizes the overhead for a complete three-agent collaboration session. 

TABLE III PER -F UNCTION GAS COSTS (50 RUNS )

Operation Avg Gas Min Max Note 

registerAgent 182,813 182,802 182,814 One-time verifyAgent 39,239 39,239 39,239 View (free) authorizeRole 63,038 63,027 63,039 Per task recordInteraction 209,693 209,332 226,444 Per entry revokeCredential 32,411 32,388 32,412 On demand TABLE IV FULL COLLABORATION SESSION OVERHEAD 

Phase Time (ms) Gas 

Registration (3 agents) 2 548,430 Authorization (3 agents) 3 189,129 Interaction Logging (30 entries) 23 6,297,900 

Total 28 7,035,459 

Table V provides an illustrative cross-chain projec-tion using the locally measured gas consumption of one 

authorizeRole transaction (63,039 gas) and representa-tive nominal block intervals and transaction-cost estimates. The final column gives a conservative upper bound on autho-rization latency, assuming all 50 independent authorization transactions are included one per block. In practice, latency is often lower because multiple transactions can be included in the same block, depending on gas limits, mempool conditions, and confirmation policies. Cost estimates are indicative and vary with network conditions. The Solana row is a deployment projection requiring a Solana-compatible implementation of the workflow. Overall, the evaluations show that neuro-symbolic decentralized governance provides comprehensive participation security and dynamic policy enforcement with practical overhead, while cross-chain projections indicate feasible deployment costs and latency across the modeled platforms. 

TABLE V CROSS -C HAIN COST PROJECTION AND CONSERVATIVE SEQUENTIAL 

AUTHORIZATION -L ATENCY BOUNDS 

Chain Block (s) Cost/tx (USD) Serial Bound (s) 

Ethereum L1 12.0 $0.0029 600.0 Optimism 2.0 $0.00001 100.0 Base 2.0 $0.000007 100.0 Arbitrum 0.26 $0.00001 13.0 Polygon PoS 2.0 $0.000001 100.0 Solana (proj.) 0.4 $0.00025 20.0 

V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper presented a neuro-symbolic decentralized gov-ernance framework for verifiable AI agent collaboration in open digital twin ecosystems. By bridging the probabilistic reasoning of modern LLMs with the deterministic guardrails of symbolic ontologies and blockchain-enforced credentials, the proposed framework shifts multi-agent collaboration from assumption-based trust to a governance-driven, evidence-based process. Experimental evaluation across diverse security scenarios shows that it prevents unauthorized participation and enforces complex institutional policies with manageable overhead, supporting a scalable foundation for the emerging Internet of Agents. More broadly, the framework contributes to human-machine systems research by showing that trust-worthy human oversight can be maintained when decision support is delegated to interacting autonomous agents across institutional boundaries. The present scope is admission governance and provenance rather than runtime verification of the clinical recommendation itself; future work will combine contract-level invariant checking with output monitoring and privacy-preserving assurance mechanisms. CODE AVAILABILITY 

The VeriGov-AI implementation, ontology artifacts, and experiment scripts are openly available at https:// github.com/weicaiuw/verigov-ai (DOI: https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21706699 ). REFERENCES [1] M. A. Ferrag, N. Tihanyi, and M. Debbah, “From llm reasoning to autonomous ai agents: A comprehensive review,” IEEE Access , 2026. [2] N. Tripathi, H. Hietala, Y. Xu, and R. Liyanage, “Stakeholders collaborations, challenges and emerging concepts in digital twin ecosystems,” Information and Software Technology , vol. 169, p. 107424, 2024. [3] S. D. Ramchurn, D. Huynh, and N. R. Jennings, “Trust in multi-agent systems,” Knowl. Eng. Rev. , vol. 19, p. 1–25, Mar. 2004. [4] T. D. Huynh, N. R. Jennings, and N. R. Shadbolt, “An integrated trust and reputation model for open multi-agent systems,” Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 119–154, 2006. [5] H. Yu, Z. Shen, C. Leung, C. Miao, and V. R. Lesser, “A survey of multi-agent trust management systems,” Ieee Access , vol. 1, pp. 35–50, 2013. [6] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, et al. , “Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 , 2023. [7] T. Guo, X. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Chang, S. Pei, N. V. Chawla, O. Wiest, and X. Zhang, “Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680 , 2024. [8] M. Sporny, D. Longley, and D. Chadwick, “Decentralized identifiers (dids) v1.0,” W3C Recommendation , 2022. [9] M. Sporny, D. Longley, and D. Chadwick, “Verifiable credentials data model v1.1,” W3C Recommendation , 2022. [10] V. Thummala and J. Chase, “Safe: A declarative trust management system with linked credentials,” 2015. [11] Y. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Yan, Z. Wan, and R. J ¨antti, “A survey on blockchain-based trust management for internet of things,” IEEE internet of Things Journal , vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 5898–5922, 2023. [12] G. D. Putra, V. Dedeoglu, S. S. Kanhere, R. Jurdak, and A. Ignjatovic, “Trust-based blockchain authorization for iot,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1646–1658, 2021. [13] A. d. Garcez and L. C. Lamb, “Neurosymbolic ai: The 3rd wave,” 

Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 12387–12406, 2023. [14] P. Hitzler, M. Sarker, T. Besold, A. Garcez, S. Bader, H. Bowman, P. Domingos, P. Hitzler, K. K ¨uhnberger, L. Lamb, et al. , “Neural-symbolic learning and reasoning: A survey and interpretation,” Frontiers in artificial intelligence and applications , vol. 342, pp. 1–51, 2022. [15] L. N. DeLong, R. F. Mir, and J. D. Fleuriot, “Neurosymbolic ai for reasoning over knowledge graphs: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 7822–7842, 2024. [16] E. Katsoulakis, Q. Wang, H. Wu, L. Shahriyari, R. Fletcher, J. Liu, L. Achenie, H. Liu, P. Jackson, Y. Xiao, et al. , “Digital twins for health: a scoping review,” NPJ digital medicine , vol. 7, no. 1, p. 77, 2024. [17] D. Drummond and A. Gonsard, “Definitions and characteristics of patient digital twins being developed for clinical use: scoping review,” 

Journal of Medical Internet Research , vol. 26, p. e58504, 2024. [18] A. Croatti, M. Gabellini, S. Montagna, and A. Ricci, “On the integration of agents and digital twins in healthcare,” Journal of Medical Systems ,vol. 44, no. 9, p. 161, 2020. [19] Y. Kalyani and R. Collier, “The role of multi-agents in digital twin implementation: Short survey,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 57, Nov. 2024.