Title: 1955_CREA_A_Collaborative_Mult.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=VzSjSUE0BZ

Number of Pages: 61

Markdown Content:
# CREA: A Collaborative Multi-Agent Framework for Creative Image Editing and Generation 

Kavana Venkatesh ∗ Connor Dunlop ∗ Pinar Yanardag 

Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 

{kavanav, cdunlop, pinary}@vt.edu https://crea-diffusion.github.io Creative Image Editing  Creative Image Generation 

> “A couch” “A car”
> Personalization
> A girl playing S*  Generated Image
> S* riding a bike  Generated Image
> Creative Video Generation
> Baseline Baseline
> Input image Input image
> Edited image Edited image
> “A train” “A dog”

Figure 1: We introduce CREA, an agentic framework inspired by the human creative process for image editing and generation. Our approach can be extended to video domain for creative video generation or can be integrated with personalization methods to further enrich creative workflows. 

Abstract 

Creativity in AI imagery remains a fundamental challenge, requiring not only the generation of visually compelling content but also the capacity to add novel, expressive, and artistically rich transformations to images. Unlike conventional editing tasks that rely on direct prompt-based modifications, creative image editing requires an autonomous, iterative approach that balances originality, coherence, and artistic intent. To address this, we introduce CREA, a novel multi-agent collabora-tive framework that mimics the human creative process. Our framework leverages a team of specialized AI agents who dynamically collaborate to conceptualize, gen-erate, critique, and enhance images. Through extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations, we demonstrate that CREA significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in diversity, semantic alignment, and creative transformation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to introduce the task of creative editing. 

1 Introduction 

Generative AI has significantly transformed the field of image generation, producing high-quality visuals with remarkable detail and realism. Advances in diffusion models [ 42 , 14 ], GANs [ 26 ], and retrieval-augmented techniques [ 5 , 49 ] have enabled powerful capabilities in content synthesis, making AI-driven image creation an essential tool for artists, designers, and various creative industries. These models have been widely applied in diverse tasks, including image-to-image translation [ 24 , 38 ,47 ], inpainting [ 42 , 33 , 25 ], style transfer [ 26 , 18 , 44 , 61 ], and content-aware editing [ 36 , 8, 7, 12 ], and opening up new frontiers in digital art, advertising, and entertainment, revolutionizing creative workflows. Despite these advancements, achieving creative and artistically rich compositions still demands sig-nificant user effort. Traditional generative approaches primarily follow a prompt-to-image paradigm, 

> ∗

Equal contribution. 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). where models synthesize high-quality visuals based on textual descriptions. However, these outputs often lack originality and artistic depth, as the models are trained to replicate patterns from their training data rather than generate novel content. As a result, users must engage in tedious prompt refinements, fine-tune model parameters, or manually edit outputs to infuse genuine creativity. This heavy reliance on user expertise and intervention limits the accessibility of generative AI as an autonomous creative assistant, placing the responsibility for creativity more on the user than on the system itself. To address this limitation, we propose the task of creative image editing, where the goal is to modify images in a way that enhances their creative and artistic qualities with minimal user intervention. Unlike conventional editing tasks that focus on making explicit, text-driven modifications, creative editing aims to transform images into novel, aesthetically rich compositions in a disentangled way. Our approach mimics the complex process of creative image generation and editing as a collaborative team effort, drawing inspiration from human workflows where specialists iteratively refine ideas to achieve a shared artistic vision. To achieve this, we introduce a novel collaborative multi-agent framework, where agents, each with a distinct role, such as a Creative Director or Art Critic , work in synergy to conceptualize, generate and refine creative outputs by grounding them in well-established guidelines distilled from established principles in creativity literature [ 6, 20 , 2, 40 ]. This structured yet flexible approach enables the disentangled creation of highly diverse and imaginative images, ensuring both novelty and coherence at every stage of the generation process. Since creativity is a complicated task to assess and evaluate, our agents leverage the extensive knowledge in multimodal LLMs [ 1] based on state-of-the-art creativity principles inspired by previous work [ 6, 20 , 40 , 2, 4]. Through both qualitative and quantitative evaluations, we demonstrate that our method consistently produces edits perceived as more creative and aesthetically pleasing compared to baseline methods. Our contributions are as follows: • We introduce a novel agentic framework for the task of creative image editing and generation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to introduce the task of ‘creative editing ’. • We incorporate a user-in-the-loop generation setting, enabling user guidance to steer the creative direction through optional interventions. This supports a more collaborative human-AI co-creation process while maintaining artistic coherence and control. • We demonstrate the versatility of our method across image editing and generation, as well as its potential for enhancing personalization workflows and creative video generation. 

2 Related Work 

Text-to-Image Models. Recent advances in diffusion models [ 23 , 42 , 45 ] have revolutionized text-to-image synthesis, enabling high-fidelity image generation guided by textual prompts. Models such as DALLE-3 [ 37 ], SDXL [ 39 ], and Flux [ 27 ] demonstrate the ability to generate visually compelling images based on textual prompts [ 55 , 53 , 30 ]. While these models produce high-quality outputs, they lack a structured mechanism to enforce creativity principles in generation. Personalized generation approaches such as DreamBooth [ 44 ] and Textual Inversion [ 18 ] focus on fine-tuning text-to-image models for specific subjects or styles. However, these methods optimize for style and subject consistency rather than generating creative images. 

Creative Image Generation and Editing. Research on creative generation in AI has advanced through GANs [ 19 , 26 ] and diffusion models, leveraging contrastive loss and diversity-based ob-jectives to encourage novel synthesis beyond category constraints [ 13 , 22 , 46 ]. Recent works such as ProCreate [ 31 ] use energy-based repulsion to steer diffusion models away from reference im-ages, while Inspiration Tree [ 50 ] employs hierarchical decomposition for conceptual hybridization. ConceptLab [ 41 ] tackles creative concept synthesis through diffusion priors, iteratively enforcing con-straints to generate novel category members. C3 [ 21 ] proposes a training-free approach for enhancing creativity by amplifying low-frequency feature maps in early layers of Stable Diffusion models. Despite their advancements, these methods require expensive retraining or optimization, and fail to generalize to broader concepts. For image editing, ControlNet [ 59 ] extends Stable Diffusion, intro-ducing external conditioning signals for localized modifications while maintaining structural integrity. SDEdit [ 36 ] and Blended Latent Diffusion [ 3] refine diffusion-based editing for finer control, while InstructPix2Pix [ 8] allows text-based transformations via user prompts. However, these approaches focus on structural fidelity rather than creativity-driven, minimal-guidance transformations. 2Figure 2: CREA Framework . We introduce a collaborative multi-agent framework for creative image editing and generation. Our framework consists of four stages, 1.a Pre-Generation Planning, 1.b Creative Image Generation/Editing, 2. Post-Generation Evaluation and 3. Self-Enhancement. Here, K is the number of maximum iterations. 

Large Language Models Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-4 [ 1 ] and PaLM [ 10 ] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in natural language understanding and generative tasks. These models leverage transformer architectures [48 ], which allows them to process large amounts of text and generate coherent and contextually relevant outputs. In creative domains, LLMs have been increasingly integrated into AI-driven artistic workflows, assisting with idea generation, structured prompt synthesis, and artistic guidance [ 35 ]. GenArtist [ 52 ] uses a multimodal single agent for general image generation and editing but does not address creative image editing and fails to leverage the collaborative nature of multiple agents for complex use cases. Several studies have explored LLMs in the context of creativity [ 32 , 62 , 29 , 11 , 28 , 16 ]; however, to the best of our knowledge, creative editing tasks have not been explicitly tackled before. Additionally, agentic frameworks, where AI systems exhibit autonomy in decision-making, iterative refinement, and adaptive goal-setting have not yet been systematically explored in the context of creative image generation or editing. 

3 Methodology 

Creativity is a multifaceted process that spans ideation, critique, refinement, and the delicate balancing of novelty with coherence. Traditional prompt -to -image pipelines handle this spectrum in a single static step, leaving users to face the burden of crafting elaborate prompts, testing variations, and manually disentangling edits. Such manual workflows are both expert - intensive; they assume deep domain knowledge to articulate abstract creative facets, and time - consuming, often requiring many trial - and -error iterations before the desired concept emerges. Our agentic framework replaces this bottleneck with a dynamic, collaborative loop that coordinates specialized AI agents such as a creative director, art critic, and refinement strategist to reason jointly and iteratively evolve an image. By structuring creativity as a multi -agent dialogue, the system mirrors human studio practice: each role contributes focused expertise while shared memory maintains global coherence. The result is higher - quality, more interpretable edits achieved with less human effort and lower computational overhead than a manual, prompt -tweaking regimen. Fig. 2 offers an overview, and the sections that follow detail each component of the framework. 

3.1 Multi-Agent Framework Design 

Our workflow mirrors structured human collaboration, assigning distinct agent roles to ensure iterative, controllable creative image editing and generation where agents are: 

Creative Director A1. This agent serves as the main decision-maker, interpreting concepts, defining a creativity blueprint, and coordinating with agents to refine, discard, or finalize the image. 

Prompt Architect A2. Translates conceptual ideas into contrastive prompts [ 9] for each creativity principle, merging them into a high-creativity prompt for the Generative Executor agent for image editing/generation and refining them iteratively based on agent feedback. 3Input  Edited Images   

> b) Creative Image Generation a) Creative Image Editing
> with background preservation
> Input Edited Edited
> Input Edited Generated Images
> “A car” “A table” “A dress” “A motorcycle” “A couch”

Figure 3: Qualitative Results for Creative Image Editing and Generation Tasks. (a) Creative Image Editing: CREA takes either a real-world or AI generated input image to produce a conceptually enriched and stylistically novel edit while preserving key structural elements. (b) Creative Image Generation: CREA receives only a minimal concept description (e.g., “a couch” or “a car”) and generates diverse, imaginative outputs without any visual input, extrapolating rich visual metaphors and materials. These results demonstrate CREA’s ability to disentangle and control creativity across editing and generation workflows. For additional results, see the appendix section. 

Generative Executor A3. This agent uses T2I models such as Flux and ControlNet for image generation or editing, dynamically selecting the appropriate diffusion model and parameters to ensure creative outputs. 

Art Critic A4. The Art Critic evaluates the generated image based on the creativity principles, assigning a score for each criterion. Given that LLMs can approximate human judgment in subjective evaluations [63], this agent uses a multimodal LLM judge to ensure sensible evaluation. 

Refinement Strategist A5. This agent translates the Critic’s feedback into actionable refinements for the next iteration. It identifies weak creative dimensions and suggests precise modifications to the 

Prompt Architect .Each agent maintains a private memory and utilizes role-specific tools to share task status and relevant information, ensuring informed decision-making at every step. We acknowledge that an agentic pipeline introduces extra orchestration effort compared with a naive single-pass T2I call. However, an agentic design is critical for several aspects (i) modularity - each agent encapsulates a narrow skill (prompt refinement, consistency auditing, local editing) that can be swapped or upgraded independently; (ii) interpretability - inter-agent messages expose an explicit reasoning trace; and (iii) extensibility - new capabilities (e.g., style transfer, safety filtering) may be added to expand the scope of the framework. See Supplementary Material for detailed agent compositions. 

3.2 Collaborative Agentic Synthesis 

Given a user-provided concept c (such as ‘a guitar’ and an input image I, our goal is to modify it to generate Ic in a creative and disentangled manner. For image generation, we follow the same pipeline with minimal modifications to produce a creative image I0 and transform it into Ic. We formulate this as an optimization problem that maximizes a Creativity Index (CI), guided by six creativity principles described below. Our method has three modular phases: Pre-Generation Planning , Post-Generation Evaluation , and Self-Enhancement with optional User-Guidance . For clarity, the following sections primarily describe our method in the context of creative editing, as the same framework extends naturally to image generation with minor adjustments. 4Input  SDEdit  InstructPix2Pix  Ledits ++  TurboEdit  Ours 

> Umbrella  Chair  Bike  Bowl
> Ours
> "A couch
> ConceptLab  Flux  SDXL

a) Qualitative Comparison for Image Editing Task  b) Qualitativ Figure 4: Qualitative Comparison of Creative Image Editing Task. We compare CREA with state-of-the-art editing methods. As shown, CREA successfully reimagines objects into creative variants in a disentangled manner, whereas other approaches either fail to produce distinctly creative edits or introduce unintended alterations. 

Creativity Principles . Our framework leverages six creativity principles, grounded in state-of-the-art creativity theories, to systematically evaluate and measure creative output. Originality ,measuring novelty and uniqueness, is inspired by Boden’s Theory of Creativity [ 6] and Guilford’s Divergent Thinking [ 20 ] framework. Expressiveness , which captures emotional impact, is influenced by Amabile’s Model of Creativity [ 2 ] and Ramachandran & Hirstein’s Laws of Aesthetics [ 40 ]. 

Aesthetic Appeal , assessing composition and harmony, is grounded in Martindale’s Aesthetic Model [ 34 ] and Berlyne’s Aesthetic Theory [ 4]. Technical Execution , evaluating craftsmanship and skill, draws from Amabile’s Model and AI Creativity Frameworks [ 2]. Unexpected Associations , reflecting surprise and ingenuity, is supported by the Geneplore Model [ 15 ] and Boden’s Combinational Creativity [ 6]. Finally, Interpretability & Depth , which considers exploration potential, is informed by Ramachandran’s Laws [ 40 ] and the Geneplore Model [ 15 ] (see Appendix for more details). These six principles are used as a creativity template T for agents to assess and refine the outputs. 

3.3 Pre-Generation Planning and Image Synthesis 

The pre-generation planning phase serves as a structured ideation stage where agents collaboratively establish a creative blueprint, B before image generation begins. This phase involves three key agents: the Creative Director A1, Prompt Architect A2, and Generative Executor A3, who collab-oratively devise the creativity prompt Pc that is both creatively rich and technically viable. First, 

Creative Director , A1 interprets the initial image I0, either user-provided or generated using the user-provided concept c to formulate a creativity blueprint B, capturing the core theme, stylistic interpretation, visual structure, and necessary constraints to balance artistic flexibility with semantic coherence (see Appendix for more details). Based on B, the Prompt Architect A2 synthesizes a set of contrastive prompts P = {p1, p 2, . . . , p 6}, each conditioned on a distinct creativity principle and are merged into a high-creativity fused prompt Pc through Chain-of-Thought [ 54 ] reasoning 

Pc = CoT-Fusion (p1, p 2, . . . , p 6) where CoT-Fusion extracts salient conceptual and stylistic at-tributes from each prompt and synthesizes them into a coherent, balanced, and conceptually rich formulation. The Generative Executor A3 evaluates the feasibility of Pc and determines T2I model-specific constraints-such as ControlNet conditioning scale, image guidance scale to anticipate the nuances of the generated blueprint. Once all agents reach a consensus, the prompt moves to the next phase for creative image generation. 5urboEdit  Ours  

> Ours
> "A couch" "A monster"
> ConceptLab  Flux  SDXL

age Editing Task  b) Qualitative Comparison for Image Generation Task Figure 5: Qualitative Comparison of Creative Image Generation Task. We compare CREA with ConceptLab, SDXL and Flux. CREA consistently produces diverse and creative generations across multiple domains. 

Image Generation: The Generative Executor , A3 plays a dual role, either generating a creative image using a T2I model or performing disentangled creative editing on an existing image, whether initially generated ( I0) or user-provided ( I0). The high-creativity structured prompt formulated during the pre-generation planning phase is then taken by the Generative Executor to synthesize the initial creative image, I0 using a text-to-image diffusion model, G as I0 = G(Pc, θ ) where θ represents model-specific parameters-such as guidance scale and ControlNet conditioning scale. The generated image, I0 serves as the starting point for the creative editing and iterative refinement process as described in the following sections. 

Image Editing: If the user provides an image instead of generating one, or if an enhancement to I0

is required, the Generative Executor performs disentangled creative edits using Ie = G(Pc, I 0, θ )

where G is the ControlNet model used to perform disentangled edits, Pc is the high-creativity editing prompt generated in the pre-generation planning phase and θ represents parameters of G. After generation or editing, the resulting image progresses to the post-generation evaluation phase to investigate if further iterative refinements are necessary. 

3.4 Post-Generation Evaluation 

The post-generation evaluation assesses the edited creative image, Ie (or I0 for generation) against the creativity template, T to maximize creativity. This Critic A4 and the Creative Director A1 collaborate, with the Critic systematically evaluating the initial edited image, Ie based on the creativity template, 

T . The Critic utilizes the LLM-as-a-Judge to evaluate the edited image Ie by assigning a creativity score, Si for each of the six ith creativity criteria on a 1-5 scale. The overall Creativity Index, CI is then computed as: CI = P6 

> i=1

Si.If the total creativity score, CI < S ϵ, where Sϵ is a predefined threshold, the edited image Ie is considered suboptimal in creativity. The Creative Director then reviews the Critic ’s evaluation and may challenge its assessment if the assigned scores misalign with the creative blueprint, B. Once a consensus is reached, Ie is either finalized or progresses to further enhancement based on the final creativity score CI .

3.4.1 Self-Enhancement with Optional User-Guidance 

While one round of editing produces optimal creative outputs, further refinement can enhance creativity. In the self-enhancement phase, all agents iteratively refine the edited image, Ie with optional human intervention. Given a maximum of K iterations, each edited image Ik is evaluated by the Critic to compute its CI . When CI < S ϵ, the Refinement Strategist , A5 identifies the low scoring 6Method CLIP ↑ LPIPS* ↑ VENDI ↑ DINO ↑ FID ↓ KID ↓ User Study-Q1 User Study-Q2                                                                                                                                                                             

> LEDITS++ 0.396 ±0.028 0.252 ±0.074 2.88 ±1.11 0.678 ±0.160 312.50 21.45 3.21 ±1.27 3.50 ±1.25 InstructPix2Pix 0.379 ±0.032 0.289 ±0.126 1.94 ±0.61 0.704 ±0.189 314.42 22.51 3.14 ±1.23 3.59 ±1.17 SDEdit 0.381 ±0.033 0.308 ±0.068 3.19 ±1.23 0.737 ±0.162 304.37 18.78 3.31 ±1.21 3.15 ±1.16 TurboEdit 0.389 ±0.031 0.192 ±0.071 2.34 ±0.94 0.735 ±0.173 320.53 24.79 3.23 ±1.29 2.63 ±1.20
> Ours (Editing) 0.417 ±0.030 0.414 ±0.157 3.70 ±1.97 0.744 ±0.185 294.19 14.02 3.34 ±1.34 3.74 ±1.21
> SDXL 0.404 ±0.033 0.636 ±0.069 6.63 ±2.85 N/A 282.22 9.67 4.37 ±0.99 3.56 ±1.10 Flux 0.359 ±0.048 0.650 ±0.088 5.84 ±2.69 N/A 270.69 9.94 4.11 ±1.27 3.00 ±1.24 ConceptLab 0.334 ±0.055 0.663 ±0.076 10.38 ±2.27 N/A 272.97 6.49 3.40 ±1.52 3.18 ±1.30
> Ours (Generation) 0.360 ±0.052 0.709 ±0.057 10.44 ±2.15 N/A 248.67 5.94 4.32 ±0.99 4.16 ±1.01

Table 1: Quantitative Comparison of Creative Image Editing and Generation. Our method surpasses state-of-the-art methods across multiple metrics for both editing and generation tasks. Note that DINO scores cannot be computed for image generation, as they rely on image-image similarity, and there is no reference image available for this task. * indicates that scores are interpreted in opposition to their conventional usage, as creative generation tasks benefit from greater perceptual distance between original and edited images. creative dimensions and proposes a refinement plan to enhance the corresponding weak dimensions, which the Prompt Architect A2 uses to refine the editing prompt, Pe as follows Pr = Pe + ∆ P

where ∆P represents the prompt adjustment that amplify specific creativity dimensions based on their evaluation scores and Pr is the refined creativity prompt. The refined prompt is used by the 

Generative Executor A3 to regenerate an improved image using Ir = G(Pr , I k).The process iterates until CI ≥ Sϵ or k ≥ K, where K is the maximum allowed iterations and 

Ik is an intermediate creative image. Users can provide real-time instructions to enhance creativity, which the Prompt Architect integrates into the evolving prompt, while the Refinement Strategist 

ensures artistic coherence. The final goal is max Ic E[CI (Ir )] where Ic is the final optimized image, achieved through iterative refinement of the refined current image, Ir .

4 Experiments 

Experimental Setup In this section, we evaluate our method’s ability to generate highly creative edits and images. All experiments use FLUX.1-dev [ 27 ]. For editing, we employ ControlNet [ 59 ]with a conditioning scale of 0.4 and Canny as the condition. For image generation, we vary the CFG scale from 3.5 to 40 to explore different levels of creativity and control. Additionally, we utilize Autogen [ 56 ] for our agentic framework. All experiments are performed on a 48GB NVIDIA L40 GPU. We use GPT-4o as our MLLM for all agents [ 1 ]. We set the Creativity Index ( CI ) threshold to 24 for editing, requiring a majority of criteria to score at least 4 (“very good”) for an image to be considered creative. For generation, we use a higher threshold of 26 to reflect greater creative freedom unconstrained by a base image. We cap the number of refinement iterations at K = 3 . A full run of the pipeline takes approximately 3–5 minutes, depending on the number of self-enhancement rounds. Our source code is publicly available at https://crea-diffusion.github.io .

4.1 Qualitative Results Creative Image Editing First, we qualitatively showcase how CREA transforms input images into various creative modifications. As seen in Fig. 3, CREA’s autonomous agents analyze the input image or concept and generate creative prompts: e.g., focusing on style, color, or thematic twists, without requiring extensive user intervention. Since no existing method is explicitly designed for creative image editing, we adapt state-of-the-art editing models for comparison. Specifically, we evaluate the following baselines: LEDITS++ [ 7 ], InstructPix2Pix [ 8], SDEdit [ 36 ] and TurboEdit [ 12 ]. For a fair comparison, we apply a “creative <object> " prompt (e.g., “a creative couch") to the baseline methods, mirroring the objective of CREA. As shown in Fig. 4, standard editing methods often fail to generate distinctly creative concepts: InstructPix2Pix typically adds vibrant colors or alters the background extensively without fundamentally reimagining the object. LEDITS++, SDEdit, and TurboEdit struggle to introduce creative features beyond superficial stylistic changes. In contrast, CREA successfully performs creative edits in a disentangled manner. For more experiments such as more fine-grained editing examples, or other image generators, please refer to Appendix D.4. 7Generated Image            

> S*reading a book
> at the beach A box in S *style
> Generated Image S*reading a book at the library S*riding eating an ice cream
> Generated Image A monster in S *style A box in S *style
> Input
> Input

b) Personalization  c) Video Gen   

> +Candy
> Input Flux + ControlNet Ours
> +Monster  +Skull

a) User -in -the -loop generation 

> Baseline videos ( CogVideoX

Figure 6: Creative applications of our method beyond image generation and editing. (a) Users can steer the creative process with additional conditions such as ‘Monster’. (b) CREA-generated images can be leveraged for personalization in creative domains. g a book 

ach  A box in S * style 

in S * style  A box in S * style 

c) Limitations 

Input Image  Edited Image 

Input Image  Edited Image 

# lization 

Baseline Generation  Creative Generation 

# c) Video Generation 

> A creative train e dog

Baseline Generation  Creative Generation 

Baseline videos ( CogVideoX ) Ours (CREA + CogvideoX )

Figure 7: Video Generation . Comparison between baseline generations from CogVideoX and CREA. Our method enables the creation of visually diverse and creative video scenes. 

Creative Image Generation For creative image generation, we compare CREA against ConceptLab [41 ], which is the closest related approach, as well as two generative baselines: Flux [ 27 ] and SDXL [ 39 ]. To ensure a fair comparison, we use the same random seed for each method in every evaluated prompt, allowing for direct visual comparisons. As illustrated in Fig. 5, CREA consistently produces diverse and creative generations across multiple domains. In contrast, ConceptLab struggles to maintain the intended concept, particularly for highly abstract or unconventional categories. For example, when generating “a monster," ConceptLab often fails to produce a meaningful interpretation, as it relies on extracting subcategories from the BLIP model. If a given concept lacks well-defined subcategories or consists of highly specific attributes, ConceptLab’s fails to perform well. CREA generalizes across a broad range of creative categories without relying on predefined subcategories. 

4.2 Quantitative Results 

For both editing and generation, we utilized 24 different objects with 25 prompts (either for editing or generation), resulting in an evaluation set of 600 images per task. 

Creative Image Editing. For image editing, we compare our method against state-of-the-art tech-niques, including LEDITS++, InstructPix2Pix, SDEdit, and TurboEdit, across a range of evaluation metrics. To assess how well the edited objects align with the text descriptions, we compute the CLIP score by measuring the similarity between the generated image and its corresponding text prompt. For evaluating diversity, we use the LPIPS [ 60 ] score, which quantifies perceptual distance between images. Unlike conventional usage where lower LPIPS indicates better reconstruction, a higher LPIPS in our case signifies stronger, more transformative edits, a desirable trait in creative tasks. Additionally, we compute the DINO [ 58 ] score which measures how well the edited image retains key structural and semantic characteristics of the original image, and Vendi [17] score, which quantifies diversity by calculating the Shannon entropy of the eigenvalues of the similarity matrix among the 8Iter 1 Iter 2 Iter 3                   

> Classifier Free Guidance Scale
> ControlNet Conditioning Scale “A Pet” “A Bowl”
> SDXL Dall -E 3 Flux
> “Creative” “Innovative” “Unusual” “Rare”
> Generation Editing
> a) Ablation for T2I Model b) Ablation for CFG and ControlNet c) Ablation for Self -Enhancement d) Ablation for Prompting e) Limitations
> Input Image Edited Image
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> 3.5 10 20 30 40

Figure 8: Ablation Study. We perform comprehensive ablation studies to analyze the design choices of CREA: (a) Model Generalization: Our method extends effectively to different generative models, such as SDXL and DALL-E. (b) Parameter Sensitivity: We ablate CFG values for Flux and the conditioning scale for ControlNet to evaluate their impact. (c) Iterative Refinement: We demonstrate the benefits of our method’s refinement process over multiple iterations. (d) Prompt Variations: We explore alternative prompts beyond ‘a creative <obj> ’. generated images. As shown in Table 1, our method consistently outperforms all baselines across all evaluation metrics, demonstrating its superior ability to generate creative and diverse image edits. 

Creative Image Generation. For creative image generation, we compare CREA against ConceptLab, Flux, and SDXL. As shown in Table 1, our method achieves superior results in LPIPS and VENDI scores, while in CLIP scores, it was outperformed by SDXL. We observe that SDXL tends to generate highly colorful images, which aligns with CLIP’s depiction of creativity. However, it produces the lowest LPIPS scores, indicating that its generated images are highly similar to each other, and it also achieves significantly lower VENDI scores compared to CREA and ConceptLab. While ConceptLab and our method achieve comparable results overall, ConceptLab has significantly lower performance CLIP scores, suggesting that its generated images do not align well with the text prompt. This limitation stems from ConceptLab’s reliance on well-defined subcategories—a core design principle of their method. As shown in Fig. 5, ConceptLab fails when a concept lacks sufficient subcategories, such as its inability to accurately generate a couch object. While ConceptLab attains a high VENDI score, this failure highlights its trade-off between diversity and semantic alignment. For additional comparisons with recent methods such as GenArtist [ 52 ] and RF-Inversion [ 43 ], see Appendix D.3. 

User Study. To assess the creativity of the generated images from a human perception standpoint, we conducted a user study on Prolific.com with 50 participants (see Table 1. Participants rated each criterion using a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Very well). For the image generation task, User Study-Q1 evaluates Usability, measuring how accurately the generated image represents the specified object. User Study-Q2 evaluates Creativity, assessing the uniqueness and originality of the image. Among all competitors, SDXL performed the best on Q1 since it is generating generic objects (e.g., a simple cup) which is perceived as more useful by participants, whereas our method significantly outperformed others on Q2 due to its ability to produce more creative visuals. For edited images, we evaluate editing consistency—how well the original image characteristics are preserved while performing edits (User Study-Q1)—and the creativity of the edits (User Study-Q2). Our method achieves comparable results to state-of-the-art editing techniques on Q1, demonstrating strong disentangled editing capabilities. Moreover, it surpasses all competitors on Q2, highlighting its superior ability to generate creative edits. 

4.3 Additional Experiments User-Guided Editing and Generation Our method enables users to guide the creative process according to their preferences (see Fig. 6 (a)). For example, users can specify not only that a creative edit should be applied to a cup but also include additional conditions, such as ‘monster’, to influence the generation. Our approach incorporates these preferences, steering the creative process accordingly. Compared to the baseline Flux + ControlNet approach, where we provided the prompt ‘A creative 

<condition> <object> ’, our results demonstrate greater creativity. 

Personalization We also present personalization results using CREA-generated creative images using an off-the-shelf personalization adapter [ 51 ]. Fig. 6 (b) demonstrates how generated subjects can be adapted to various contexts or how their styles can be transferred to create new images. Note that due 9Method LPIPS-Diversity ↑ Vendi ↑                        

> Base 0.302 ±0.129 3.19 ±1.49 +Principles 0.312 ±0.142 3.59 ±2.46 +Contrastive 0.391 ±0.150 3.50 ±1.64 +Self-Enhancement 0.414 ±0.157 3.70 ±1.97

Table 2: Ablation Study for CREA. CREA achieves the highest performance across all metrics when all components are utilized, demonstrating the effectiveness of our full framework. to the limitations in personalization models, some fine-grained details were not able to capture by [51], however the main characteristics are still preserved. 

Video Generation To demonstrate the versatility and extensibility of our agentic framework, we extend CREA to creative video generation, where an initial prompt (e.g., ‘a train’) is automatically transformed into creative scenes. We conduct experiments using the CogVideoX [ 57 ] model as the generative backbone. Instead of initializing the process with a static creative blueprint, our Creative Director agent generates a structured creative video plan containing key fields: Subject , Action ,

Setting , Style , and optional Additional Details . This plan is passed to the Prompt Architect, who composes a coherent and high-creativity video prompt via contrastive prompt fusion, similar to our image generation pipeline. The Generative Executor then synthesizes the video using CogVideoX. This evaluation serves as a proof of concept for applying our multi-agent creativity principles beyond static imagery. As shown in Figure 7, our method produces significantly more imaginative and visually engaging results compared to baseline model. 

Ablation Studies We perform comprehensive ablation studies to analyze the design choices of CREA (see Fig. 8). (a) Ablation on Generalization to other T2I models : Our method extends effectively to different generative models, such as SDXL and DALL-E. (b) Ablation on Parameter Sensitivity :We ablate CFG values (3.5-40) for Flux and the conditioning scale for ControlNet (0.1-0.5) to evaluate their impact. (c) Ablation on Iterative Refinement : We demonstrate the benefits of our method’s refinement process over multiple iterations. (d) Ablation on Prompt Variations : We explore alternative prompts beyond ‘a creative <obj> ’ to steer the model away from conventional generations. (e) Ablation on Model Components We also conduct an ablation study on our key components (see Table 2). The base version represents a baseline where the multi-modal LLM model is simply prompted to generate a creative description for a given object. Please see Appendix for more ablations, such as an ablation with negative prompting. 

5 Discussion 

Limitations and Broader Impact Since our framework utilizes a T2I model such as Flux, certain biases inherent to the generative backbone can affect the outputs. For instance, we observe cases where the background is unintentionally darkened based on the object’s semantics (e.g., editing a “lighted box” often results in darker surroundings to emphasize contrast), or where the model hallucinates human figures even when not prompted (see Fig. 8 (e)). Moreover, we recognize that defining and quantifying visual creativity is itself an open research problem. Instead of introducing a new assessment protocol, we tackle creative image editing and generation through established principles in creativity. Assessing what is truly a creative output, however, remains beyond the scope of this paper. For broader impacts, on the positive side, our agentic framework can democratize high-level creative tools, lowering barriers for artists, educators, and hobbyists to experiment with sophisticated visual storytelling. Potential downsides include possible displacement of human labor in creative industries. We encourage responsible deployment by fostering human-in-the-loop usage that positions the system as a co-creative assistant rather than a replacement for human creators. 

Conclusion In this work, we introduce a novel agentic framework for creative image editing and generation, pioneering a disentangled approach that enables greater flexibility and artistic control. By leveraging specialized agents that collaborate to refine and enhance outputs, our method overcomes the limitations of traditional prompt-to-image models, reducing the burden on users while fostering creativity. We demonstrate the versatility of our approach across editing and generation, and highlight its potential for creative video generation. Our findings suggest that agentic frameworks can serve as a powerful foundation for more autonomous and creative AI systems, opening new directions for creative collaboration between humans and AI. 10 References 

[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023. [2] Teresa M Amabile. The social psychology of creativity: a componential conceptualization. 

Journal of personality and social psychology , 45(2):357, 1983. [3] Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski. Blended latent diffusion. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG) , 42(4):1–11, 2023. [4] Daniel E Berlyne. Aesthetics and psychobiology. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , 31 (4), 1973. [5] Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Kaan Oktay, Jonas Müller, and Björn Ommer. Retrieval-augmented diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15309– 15324, 2022. [6] Margaret A Boden. The creative mind: Myths and mechanisms . Routledge, 2004. [7] Manuel Brack, Felix Friedrich, Katharia Kornmeier, Linoy Tsaban, Patrick Schramowski, Kristian Kersting, and Apolinário Passos. Ledits++: Limitless image editing using text-to-image models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8861–8870, 2024. [8] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 18392–18402, 2023. [9] Yew Ken Chia, Guizhen Chen, Luu Anh Tuan, Soujanya Poria, and Lidong Bing. Contrastive chain-of-thought prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09277 , 2023. [10] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(240): 1–113, 2023. [11] Matthew DeLorenzo, Vasudev Gohil, and Jeyavijayan Rajendran. Creativeval: Evaluating creativity of llm-based hardware code generation. In 2024 IEEE LLM Aided Design Workshop (LAD) , pages 1–5. IEEE, 2024. [12] Gilad Deutch, Rinon Gal, Daniel Garibi, Or Patashnik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Turboedit: Text-based image editing using few-step diffusion models. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers , pages 1–12, 2024. [13] Ahmed Elgammal, Bingchen Liu, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Marian Mazzone. Can: Creative adversarial networks, generating" art" by learning about styles and deviating from style norms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.07068 , 2017. [14] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow trans-formers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first international conference on machine learning , 2024. [15] Ronald A Finke, Thomas B Ward, and Steven M Smith. Creative cognition: Theory, research, and applications . MIT press, 1996. [16] Giorgio Franceschelli and Mirco Musolesi. On the creativity of large language models. AI & society , 40(5):3785–3795, 2025. [17] Dan Friedman and Adji Bousso Dieng. The vendi score: A diversity evaluation metric for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02410 , 2022. 11 [18] Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 , 2022. [19] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks, 2014. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.2661 .[20] Joy Paul Guilford. Creativity. American psychologist , 5(9), 1950. [21] Jiyeon Han, Dahee Kwon, Gayoung Lee, Junho Kim, and Jaesik Choi. Enhancing creative generation on stable diffusion-based models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 28609–28618, 2025. [22] Amin Heyrani Nobari, Muhammad Fathy Rashad, and Faez Ahmed. Creativegan: Editing gen-erative adversarial networks for creative design synthesis. In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference , volume 85383, page V03AT03A002. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2021. [23] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [24] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1125–1134, 2017. [25] Xuan Ju, Xian Liu, Xintao Wang, Yuxuan Bian, Ying Shan, and Qiang Xu. Brushnet: A plug-and-play image inpainting model with decomposed dual-branch diffusion. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 150–168. Springer, 2024. [26] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 4401–4410, 2019. [27] Black Forest Labs. Flux. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux , 2024. [28] Jialian Li, Ludan ZHANG, Jian Xie, Dong Yan, et al. Data-driven creativity: Amplifying imagination in llm writing. [29] Jiayang Li, Jiale Li, and Yunsheng Su. A map of exploring human interaction patterns with llm: Insights into collaboration and creativity. In International conference on human-computer interaction , pages 60–85. Springer, 2024. [30] Vivian Liu and Lydia B Chilton. Design guidelines for prompt engineering text-to-image generative models. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems , pages 1–23, 2022. [31] Jack Lu, Ryan Teehan, and Mengye Ren. Procreate, don’t reproduce! propulsive energy diffusion for creative generation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 397–414. Springer, 2024. [32] Li-Chun Lu, Shou-Jen Chen, Tsung-Min Pai, Chan-Hung Yu, Hung-yi Lee, and Shao-Hua Sun. Llm discussion: Enhancing the creativity of large language models via discussion framework and role-play. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06373 , 2024. [33] Andreas Lugmayr, Martin Danelljan, Andres Romero, Fisher Yu, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Repaint: Inpainting using denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 11461–11471, 2022. [34] Colin Martindale. The pleasures of thought: A theory of cognitive hedonics. The Journal of Mind and Behavior , pages 49–80, 1984. [35] Marian Mazzone and Ahmed Elgammal. Art, creativity, and the potential of artificial intelligence. In Arts , volume 8, page 26. MDPI, 2019. 12 [36] Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon. Sdedit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01073 , 2021. [37] OpenAI. DALL-E 3. https://openai.com/index/dall-e-3/ , 2023. [38] Gaurav Parmar, Krishna Kumar Singh, Richard Zhang, Yijun Li, Jingwan Lu, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 conference proceedings ,pages 1–11, 2023. [39] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.01952 , 2023. [40] Vilayanur S Ramachandran and William Hirstein. The science of art: A neurological theory of aesthetic experience. Journal of consciousness Studies , 6(6-7):15–51, 1999. [41] Elad Richardson, Kfir Goldberg, Yuval Alaluf, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Conceptlab: Creative concept generation using vlm-guided diffusion prior constraints. ACM Transactions on Graphics ,43(3):1–14, 2024. [42] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022. [43] Litu Rout, Yujia Chen, Nataniel Ruiz, Constantine Caramanis, Sanjay Shakkottai, and Wen-Sheng Chu. Semantic image inversion and editing using rectified stochastic differential equa-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10792 , 2024. [44] Nataniel Ruiz, Yuanzhen Li, Varun Jampani, Yael Pritch, Michael Rubinstein, and Kfir Aberman. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for subject-driven generation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 22500–22510, 2023. [45] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:36479–36494, 2022. [46] Othman Sbai, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Antoine Bordes, Yann LeCun, and Camille Couprie. Design: Design inspiration from generative networks. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) workshops , pages 0–0, 2018. [47] Narek Tumanyan, Michal Geyer, Shai Bagon, and Tali Dekel. Plug-and-play diffusion features for text-driven image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1921–1930, 2023. [48] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [49] Kavana Venkatesh, Yusuf Dalva, Ismini Lourentzou, and Pinar Yanardag. Context canvas: Enhancing text-to-image diffusion models with knowledge graph-based rag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09614 , 2024. [50] Yael Vinker, Andrey Voynov, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Ariel Shamir. Concept decomposition for visual exploration and inspiration. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , 42(6):1–13, 2023. [51] Haofan Wang, Matteo Spinelli, Qixun Wang, Xu Bai, Zekui Qin, and Anthony Chen. In-stantstyle: Free lunch towards style-preserving in text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02733 , 2024. [52] Zhenyu Wang, Aoxue Li, Zhenguo Li, and Xihui Liu. Genartist: Multimodal llm as an agent for unified image generation and editing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:128374–128395, 2024. 13 [53] Zijie J Wang, Evan Montoya, David Munechika, Haoyang Yang, Benjamin Hoover, and Duen Horng Chau. Diffusiondb: A large-scale prompt gallery dataset for text-to-image genera-tive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14896 , 2022. [54] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. [55] Sam Witteveen and Martin Andrews. Investigating prompt engineering in diffusion models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15462 , 2022. [56] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, et al. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. [57] Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et al. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072 , 2024. [58] Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Shilong Liu, Lei Zhang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Lionel M Ni, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Dino: Detr with improved denoising anchor boxes for end-to-end object detection. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03605 , 2022. [59] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pages 3836–3847, 2023. [60] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unrea-sonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 586–595, 2018. [61] Zhanjie Zhang, Quanwei Zhang, Huaizhong Lin, Wei Xing, Juncheng Mo, Shuaicheng Huang, Jinheng Xie, Guangyuan Li, Junsheng Luan, Lei Zhao, et al. Towards highly realistic artistic style transfer via stable diffusion with step-aware and layer-aware prompt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11474 , 2024. [62] Yunpu Zhao, Rui Zhang, Wenyi Li, and Ling Li. Assessing and understanding creativity in large language models. Machine Intelligence Research , 22(3):417–436, 2025. [63] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:46595–46623, 2023. 

NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We clearly state our claims in the introduction and abstract, and support them through extensive qualitative and quantitative experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. 14 • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have a clearly marked limitations section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our paper does not include theoretical results. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? 15 Answer: [Yes] Justification: We discuss relevant details in the experimental setup and supplementary and additionally provide our code with supplementary. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide code and usage instructions with supplementary. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. 16 • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide important details about models, parameters, and how competitors were prompted in experimental setup and full setup including tool usage, memory, etc. in supplementary. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide standard deviation with all of our computed metrics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] 17 Justification: We include details about GPU usage, memory, and run time in experimental setup and supplementary. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: We reviewed and meet all aspects of the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We include this in our broader impacts section. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

18 Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our work does not pose such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We properly cite all frameworks and models used in this paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide our code with the supplementary, and it is well documented to support reproducibility and clarity. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. 19 • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide screenshots from our user study in the supplementary and the paid platform where it was conducted. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [No] Justification: Our conducted user study does not pose such risks, so we did not describe them in the paper. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our method uses a collaborative multi-agent framework in which LLMs serve as core components (e.g., Creative Director, Art Critic). These agents directly contribute to generation and evaluation, making LLMs an important part of the methodology. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 20 Table of Contents 

A Investigating Creativity Types 1B CREA’s Multi-Agentic Architecture 2

B.1 CREA’s Multi-Agent Framework Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2B.2 Creative Director ( A1) Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2B.3 Prompt Architect ( A2) Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3B.4 Generative Executor ( A3) Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3B.5 Art Critic ( A4) Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3B.6 Refinement Strategist ( A5) Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3B.7 Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4B.8 Runtime and Practical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

C CREA Editing and Generation Prompts 5

C.1 Creative Image Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5C.2 Creative Image Editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

D Additional Experiments 11 

D.1 Additional Ablations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 D.2 User Study Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 D.3 Additional Quantitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 D.4 Additional Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

A Investigating Creativity Types 

We investigate emerging patterns in generated images to identify key attributes—shape, color, and texture that influence creativity. Our analysis reveals that our method achieves significantly higher scores in these aspects, leading to the generation of more visually diverse and imaginative objects (see Fig. 9). Compared to baseline models, our approach demonstrates a stronger ability to manipulate these factors, reinforcing its effectiveness in producing unique and aesthetically rich generations. We also investigate emerging factors for different objects within our method (see Fig. 10). 

Figure 9: Emerging patterns in the generated images across CREA, ConceptLab, Flux, and SDXL reveal that our method achieves significantly higher scores in shape, color, and texture, enabling the generation of more creative objects. 1Figure 10: Emerging patterns in the generated images across various objects reveal that our method dynamically emphasizes different factors - such as shape, color, or texture depending on the object, effectively enhancing creativity in a context-aware manner. Method Originality ↑ Expressiveness ↑ Aesthetic ↑ Technical ↑ Unexpected ↑ Interpretability ↑ Total ↑ Creativity ↑                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> LEDITS++ 3.04 ±0.74 2.52 ±0.66 3.56 ±0.55 3.80 ±0.47 2.86 ±0.84 2.60 ±0.71 18.38 ±3.37 77.80 ±8.83 InstructPix2Pix 2.43 ±0.91 2.28 ±0.80 3.59 ±0.54 3.76 ±0.51 2.12 ±0.82 2.21 ±0.78 16.39 ±3.70 69.78 ±15.94 SDEdit 2.50 ±0.87 2.12 ±0.72 3.35 ±0.50 3.59 ±0.51 2.12 ±0.78 2.07 ±0.72 15.74 ±3.42 69.39 ±13.54 TurboEdit 2.68 ±0.76 2.12 ±0.62 3.28 ±0.50 3.66 ±0.47 2.44 ±0.78 2.12 ±0.62 16.30 ±3.11 71.34 ±13.87 Ours (Editing) 3.77 ±1.00 3.49 ±1.03 4.49 ±0.62 4.61 ±0.55 3.66 ±1.12 3.46 ±1.03 23.48 ±4.95 83.47 ±6.68
> SDXL 3.45 ±0.89 3.30 ±0.77 4.15 ±0.52 4.31 ±0.49 3.33 ±1.00 3.32 ±0.79 21.85 ±3.91 82.95 ±6.56 Flux 2.87 ±0.69 3.05 ±0.74 4.12 ±0.54 4.17 ±0.47 2.59 ±0.78 2.86 ±0.64 19.66 ±3.14 79.46 ±7.82 ConceptLab 3.49 ±0.75 3.32 ±0.84 3.75 ±0.77 3.93 ±0.71 3.42 ±0.83 3.34 ±0.81 21.25 ±4.13 80.99 ±6.84 Ours (Generation) 4.39 ±0.69 4.55 ±0.54 4.98 ±0.16 4.96 ±0.20 4.39 ±0.70 4.42 ±0.64 27.68 ±2.55 89.87 ±4.04

Table 3: Quantitative Comparison of Creative Image Editing and Generation using LLM-as-a-judge. We used a multi-modal LLM as a judge for simulating human-like subjective assessments across several key aspects of creativity. Our method surpasses state-of-the-art methods across all aspects for both editing and generation tasks. 

B CREA’s Multi-Agentic Architecture 

B.1 CREA’s Multi-Agent Framework Design 

In the CREA framework, prompts serve as the fundamental coordination interface between specialized agents, guiding the collaborative creative process. Unlike traditional systems that rely on static user prompts, CREA uses modular, role-specific prompting strategies to simulate a human-like creative workflow. These prompts enable agents to reason contextually, communicate asynchronously, and iteratively improve upon the image through multiple refinement cycles. Our multi-agent framework is composed of five roles: Creative Director, Prompt Architect, Generative Executor, Art Critic, and Refinement Strategist . Each agent is instantiated with a carefully designed system prompt tailored to its unique responsibilities. These prompts are not only essential for aligning agent behavior with creativity principles, but also for facilitating coherent multi-turn conversations between agents. The following subsections describe the prompt structure for each agent, explain its purpose, and highlight how it contributes to the overall creativity loop. For each, we refer to specific examples and prompt templates shown in the supplementary material. 

B.2 Creative Director ( A1) Prompt 

The Creative Director serves as the strategic leader of the agent team. Its prompt equips it not only to interpret the user-provided input (e.g., ‘a couch’) but also to conceptualize a feasible, imaginative, and well-grounded plan for the entire task. More than just an interpreter, the Creative Director performs high-level planning, coordination, and decision-making. It establishes the overall direction of the creative task, specifies whether the objective is image generation or editing, and formulates a comprehensive creativity blueprint. This blueprint includes the visual theme, stylistic and structural constraints, novelty objectives, semantic anchors, and any potential unexpected associations that could add conceptual depth. Once defined, this blueprint is shared with all other agents and acts as the central reference point throughout the iterative process. The Creative Director also participates in post-generation evaluation, arbitrates conflicts in Critic feedback, and decides whether an output is ready for finalization or requires refinement. A high-level system prompt used for the Director, A1 is shown in Template 13. 2B.3 Prompt Architect ( A2) Prompt 

The Prompt Architect operates as the creative translator and synthesis engine of the system. Based on the Creative Director’s blueprint and the creativity template, this agent generates a structured set of prompts to guide the generative process. It first decomposes the blueprint into six contrastive prompts, each aligned with a specific creativity principle—originality, expressiveness, aesthetic appeal, technical execution, unexpected associations, and interpretability. These prompts isolate individual creative dimensions, allowing for focused exploration of each aspect. The template used by 

A2 to generate Contrastive Prompts is shown in Template 9. Once the contrastive prompts are created, the Prompt Architect uses a Chain-of-Thought fusion process to synthesize them into a single fused high-creativity prompt as shown in Template 10. This fused prompt balances all six principles while preserving semantic clarity and stylistic coherence. Throughout the generation loop, the Prompt Architect also integrates feedback from the Refinement Strategist, modifying or rebalancing prompts as needed to improve underperforming dimensions. This iterative prompting system enables nuanced control over the generation process while ensuring alignment with the blueprint. A high-level system prompt used for the Prompt Architect, A2 is shown in Template 8. 

B.4 Generative Executor ( A3) Prompt 

The Generative Executor is responsible for realizing the creative vision by generating or editing images based on the prompts received from the Prompt Architect. Guided by its system prompt, this agent dynamically interprets the creative instruction and configures the appropriate image generation strategy using T2I models such as Flux or ControlNet. The Executor considers the task type (generation or editing), model-specific parameters like classifier-free guidance or conditioning scale, and any constraints defined by the blueprint. In editing mode, it ensures disentangled transformation by preserving structural elements from the input image while applying stylistic or conceptual changes aligned with the fused prompt. A high-level system prompt used for the Executor, A3 is shown in Template 11. 

B.5 Art Critic ( A4) Prompt 

The Art Critic acts as an autonomous evaluator, responsible for analyzing the generated or edited image and providing structured, multi-dimensional feedback. Its system prompt enables it to assess the output based on the six creativity principles and assign numerical scores from 1 to 5 for each dimension. The Critic also produces rich textual justifications for its ratings and provides an overall creativity score. Beyond evaluation, the Critic serves a pivotal role in steering the refinement process by identifying which dimensions underperform and articulating why. This feedback is critical to both the Creative Director, who decides whether the image meets the creativity threshold, and to the Refinement Strategist, who uses it to guide further improvements. The Critic’s evaluations are grounded in a multi-modal LLM, ensuring assessments are both visually and semantically informed. This agent’s consistent, transparent scoring facilitates traceable progress across iterations. high-level system prompt used for the Critic, A4 is shown in Template 12. 

B.6 Refinement Strategist ( A5) Prompt 

The Refinement Strategist is the system’s adaptive problem solver. Upon receiving the Critic’s evaluation and the current image, this agent analyzes weak areas in the creativity spectrum and formulates a targeted refinement strategy. Its system prompt allows it to propose actionable changes using a formulation ∆P that identifies how the existing fused prompt should be adjusted to improve specific dimensions, such as expressiveness or technical execution. The strategist is also tasked with preserving creative coherence; it aligns each suggested change with the original blueprint to avoid drift or over-editing. Its feedback is passed to the Prompt Architect, who updates the prompts accordingly for the next iteration. The Strategist plays a critical role in achieving optimal creativity without compromising conceptual consistency, functioning as the bridge between critique and constructive improvement. A representative example of its prompt behavior and refinement plan is available in Template 14. 3Algorithm 1 CREA Method Overview 

Input: User concept c or Initial image I0, Max iterations K, Creativity threshold Sϵ

Given: Creativity principles template, T

Init: Agents {A 1 : A5}

Pre-Generation Planning  

> 1:

if generation task then  

> 2:

A1 → B from c 

> 3:

else if editing task then  

> 4:

A1 → B from I0 (initial generation/user-provided)  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

A2 → P = {p1, p 2, ..., p 6} 

> 7:

A2 → Pc = CoT-Fusion (P ) 

> 8:

A3 → Validate Pc, adjust model parameters 

Image Synthesis and Editing  

> 9:

if Generating a new image then  

> 10:

I0 = G(Pc, θ ) 

> 11:

else if Editing an existing image then  

> 12:

Ie = G(Pc, I 0, θ ) 

> 13:

end if Post-Generation Evaluation  

> 14:

A4 → S = {S1, ..., S 6} for Ie 

> 15:

Compute CI = P6 

> i=1

Si, Si ∈ [1 , 5]  

> 16:

if CI ≥ Sϵ then  

> 17:

return Ie as Ic 

> 18:

else  

> 19:

Proceed to refinement phase  

> 20:

end if Self-Enhancement with Optional User-Guidance  

> 21:

for k = 1 to K do  

> 22:

A5 → Identify weak Si, suggest refinements  

> 23:

A2 → Pr = Pe + ∆ P ▷ refined prompt, Pr 

> 24:

A3 → Ir = G(Pr , I k, θ ) ▷ intermediate image, Ik 

> 25:

A4 → S = {S1, ..., S 6} for Ir ▷ refined image, Ir 

> 26:

if CI ≥ Sϵ then  

> 27:

return Ir as Ic 

> 28:

end if  

> 29:

end for Output: Final high-creativity image Ic

B.7 Algorithm 

An algorithm summarizing the agentic framework is given in Algorithm 1. CREA is built on a dynamic multi-agent architecture that emulates the collaborative human cre-ative process by distributing cognitive and generative responsibilities across specialized agents. Each agent in the system plays a distinct role and is instantiated using the AutoGen framework’s ConversableAgent class, enabling structured communication, tool access, and memory management. 

Creative Director ( A1): Acts as the master orchestrator. Powered by GPT-4o, this agent defines the overall creative blueprint, interprets user goals or concepts, and decides whether a generated image meets the creativity criteria. It has functional tools to collaborative with all other agents and a tool to determine if the creativity index, CI is greater than the defined threshold. It does not execute code but uses a shared memory to track blueprint adherence across rounds. 

Prompt Architect ( A2): Converts the blueprint into six contrastive prompts based on creativity principles (e.g., Originality, Aesthetic Appeal), which are fused into a high-creativity composite prompt using Chain-of-Thought reasoning. This agent uses GPT-4o and has access to prompt-fusion tools and tools to interact with other agents, enabling it to translate abstract directives into actionable instructions. It uses the shared memory to track progress, store base templates, and exchange updates. 4Generative Executor ( A3): Interfaces with the image generation or editing backend (e.g., FLUX, ControlNet). It has code execution capabilities and is responsible for producing images using prompt, 

Pc and associated parameters like classifier-free guidance (CFG) or conditioning scales. It can perform both text-to-image generation and disentangled image editing and has access to predefined tools to adjust the hyperparameters of models. In addition, it has tools to manipulate images based on instructions from the CreativeDirector or the User-such as personalization and creative video editing. Its toolbox is highly customizable to incorporate training-free image editing and personalization tools. 

Art Critic ( A4): Uses a multi-modal LLM judge (GPT-4o with vision capabilities) to evaluate the image against six creativity criteria. It returns per-dimension scores (1–5 scale) and an aggregate Creativity Index ( CI ). This agent is crucial for quality control and can challenge previous creative decisions. Art Critic has access to tools to interact with other agents. However, its shared memory has a window _size = 1 . This is intentional and ensures independent evaluation of each generated creative image, without being influences by previous evaluations. 

Refinement Strategist ( A5): Translates evaluation feedback into actionable prompt refinements. It identifies weak creative dimensions (e.g., low expressiveness) and proposes targeted edits. It works closely with A2 to iteratively improve the prompt and coordinates with A3 to re-render improved results. It uses GPT-4o and has access to interaction tools and the shared memory to track information and updates. A UserProxyAgent models Human-in-the-loop and is turned on for optional user-guidance. 

B.8 Runtime and Practical Considerations 

A full round of creative generation or editing with three iterations of self-enhancement typically takes 3–5 minutes on an NVIDIA L40 GPU using FLUX.1-dev1 and ControlNet for editing. The runtime is dependent on several factors-such as prompt complexity, tool execution overhead and LLM inference time. Each agent uses GPT-4o (via API), which contributes significantly to latency, especially during multi-agent coordination and critique. In practice, the system is designed for rapid prototyping while maintaining high creativity scores. Early stopping is applied when the Creativity Index, CI ≥ 24 for editing and CI ≥ 26 for generation, minimizing unnecessary iterations. Optional user feedback can intervene between rounds for guided refinements. CI for editing and generation are chosen based on experimentation and can be adjusted according to user-preferences. 

C CREA Editing and Generation Prompts 

We provide the full natural language prompts used to produce the visual results shown in the teaser figure 1 of the main paper. Examples include both creative image editing (transformations of real-world or AI generated images of objects such as dresses and teapots) and creative image generation (novel interpretations of minimal text inputs such “as "a couch” or “a car”). Each prompt was written to embody multiple creativity principles - e.g., combining unexpected materials, evoking emotional tone, or supporting layered interpretation, resulting in conceptually rich and visually expressive outputs. Figure 11 shows these prompts. 

C.1 Creative Image Generation 

Creative image generation in CREA unfolds through a structured, collaborative multi-agent workflow composed of three key phases: Pre-Generation Planning, Image Generation, Self-Enhancement and Post-Generation Evaluation. Each phase involves distinct agent roles engaging in goal-driven dialogue to ideate, generate, and refine creative imagery. We provide an illustrative example of the collaborative multi-agent debate for image generation using our proposed three-phase approach in the next sections. Note that the conversations are color-coded as follows: {“REASON”: “red”, “THOUGHT”: “pink”, “ACTION”: “green”, “PROMPT”: ...} .5Transform a plain ivory wedding gown into a galactic forest gown that 

blossoms with bioluminescent flowers at dusk . The skirt should be adorned with 

luminous petals that glow like nebulae, embroidered with constellations and 

sunburst filaments that shift color from teal to ember as they flow downward .

Integrate microscopic glowing fireflies trailing wisps of stardust, as if the dress 

itself breathes the night sky . The gown should merge elements of nature and the 

cosmos, creating a silhouette that evokes both rooted earth and expanding 

universe .

Transform this plain ceramic teapot into an ancient alchemical artifact that 

releases sentient, rainbow -colored vapor dragons with every pour . The body of 

the teapot is cracked with glowing golden kintsugi veins and etched with 

forgotten glyphs that pulse faintly when touched . Each puff of steam should 

unfurl into swirling creatures, some form shimmering koi , others mimic 

constellations before vanishing like memories . The entire form should feel like 

it holds stories , not liquid .

"a couch" 

"a couch" 

"a car" 

"a car" 

Design a couch inspired by ancient sea dragons and mythological guardians of 

the deep . The frame should be sculpted from iridescent sea serpent scales with 

organic curves, textured like coral reefs . Each armrest takes the form of a

mythical creature : one a curled seahorse guardian, the other a majestic dragon 

head with antler -like horns and glowing eyes . The upholstery should shimmer 

with aquatic blues and greens, embedded with encrusted gemstones and 

barnacle -like ornaments . It is not merely furniture ; it’s a throne salvaged from 

a drowned empire .

Generate a whimsical couch made entirely of oversized, semi -transparent soap 

bubbles, each cushion formed from pearlescent orbs that glisten with pastel 

rainbows . The surface should be soft and glossy, with reflections shifting gently 

in ambient light like prisms . The couch structure subtly morphs as if floating, 

giving it an airy, buoyant feel . Some bubbles appear to breathe or pulse slightly, 

as if alive . It is a surreal seating object designed for a lucid dreamscape or a

child’s imagined sky palace .

Design a wild, untamed car that fuses aggressive biopunk aesthetics with 

vibrant organic growth . The body of the car should erupt with layered spikes, 

petals, and horn -like structures resembling exotic flowers, coral formations, 

and dragonfruit skins . Each protrusion should appear both dangerous and 

beautiful, some soft like blossoms, others hard and crystalline . The car’s 

interior is inspired by blooming orchids, with petal -shaped seats and vine -like 

steering appendages . It’s not just a vehicle ; it’s a living, breathing organism 

evolved for speed and spectacle .

Create a futuristic concept car sculpted entirely from crystalline glass and 

iridescent mineral, as if forged from light itself . The chassis should reflect and 

refract ambient sunlight like a prism, casting spectral rainbows onto the 

mirrored ground . The wheels should appear to float, with transparent spokes 

and gemstone -like hubs . Its surface geometry blends smooth curves with subtle 

faceted edges, resembling cut diamonds . Designed for a world where vehicles 

are crafted from starlight and silence, this car should feel both fragile and 

eternal .

Original Image  Creative Edit  CREA's Editing Prompt 

Input Concept  Creative Image  CREA's Generation Prompt 

> Creative Editing Creative Generation

Figure 11: Creative Image Editing and Generation Prompts. Full prompts corresponding to the visual examples shown in the teaser figure of the main paper. Top: real-world images transformed via richly imaginative editing prompts. Bottom: novel objects generated from minimal textual prompts. 

C.1.1 Pre-Generation Planning 

In this phase, the agents collectively interpret the user-provided concept (e.g., “Couch”) and co-develop a high-creativity prompt. As shown in Figure 12, the Creative Director (A1) begins by synthesizing a creativity blueprint capturing the visual theme, style, constraints, and suggested associations-such asblending fantasy elements with recognizability. This blueprint is handed to the Prompt Architect (A2), who then generates six contrastive prompts, each aligned with a specific creativity principle (e.g., originality, aesthetic appeal, technical execution). These are merged via Chain-of-Thought reasoning into a single, richly structured prompt. The Generative Executor (A3) then verifies the technical feasibility of the prompt. This multi-agent back-and-forth ensures the final creative prompt is both imaginative and model-compatible before proceeding to image synthesis. 

Image Generation 

6TASK: Given a user input concept, compose a high-creativity for creative image generation 

Input Concept: Couch 

{"task":  "Surreal Couch Design", 

"master_plan":  "Blend reality and fantasy with levitating, shape-shifting, or organic elements.", 

"feasibility_constraints":  "Must be recognizable as a couch; avoid overly complex forms.", 

"style_aesthetic_direction":  "Daring and experimental, with a vibrant yet harmonious color palette.", 

"elements_focal_points":  "Reflective or living surfaces, integration of water/plants, couch in unconventional 

settings.", 

"unexpected_associations":  "Juxtapose soft/hard textures, traditional/avant-garde designs, creative lighting for 

depth.", 

"output":  "High-res concept image or 3D render with brief design rationale." }

Creative Director : THOUGHT [ I will instruct the Prompt Architect (A2) to craft six contrastive prompts 

based on the blueprint and then merge them into one comprehensive, high-creativity prompt. Once the 

Generative Executor (A3) verifies technical feasibility, we will move forward with the image creation. ]

Creative Director (to Prompt Architect):  ACTION [ Generate the set of Contrastive Prompts based on 

the Blueprint for each of the six creativity principles in the template ]

Prompt Architect:  THOUGHT [ I will access the generated blueprint and the creativity template. ]

Prompt Architect:  REASON [ Analyze the blueprint and the required creativity principles ]

Prompt Architect:  ACTION [ Generate six contrastive prompts ] --> 

{"originality":"A couch floating effortlessly in mid-air, its cushions transforming into soft clouds under an 

azure sky.","expressiveness":"A vintage leather couch on an empty stage, bathed in warm golden light as 

it conjures nostalgia and serene solitude.","aesthetic":"An elegantly curved velvet couch surrounded by 

cascading emerald vines and delicate cherry blossom petals against a sapphire twilight 

backdrop.","technical":"A couch exquisitely crafted from intricate marble carvings, showcasing rich 

textures and elaborate patterns in a dimly lit gallery.","unexpected":"A couch with cushions made of 

tessellating geometric kaleidoscopes, seamlessly blending into an abstract art gallery 

wall.","interpretability":"A couch in a deserted attic where its worn fabric narrates silent tales of past 

occupants, alongside the scattered memories of old suitcases and dusty books." }

Prompt Architect:  ACTION [ Fuses contrastive prompts via Chain-of-Thought to get high-creativity 

prompt ]

{"fused_prompt":"A couch that defies expectations and invites the viewer into a world of wonder. Picture 

a luxurious couch crafted from an intricate blend of materials—velvet cushions that morph into soft 

clouds gently floating above, juxtaposed with richly textured marble armrests. This central piece, 

hovering against a pure white background, holds the eye with its elegant curves and vibrant emerald 

vines that cascade over its form, ending in delicate cherry blossom petals. Unexpectedly, geometric 

kaleidoscopes can be glimpsed within the cushions, offering a changeable pattern that weaves in and out 

of perception. Bathed in a subtly shifting light, this couch evokes feelings of nostalgia and curiosity, each 

glance revealing new stories written in its worn but elegant fabric, reminiscent of an animated stage or 

cinematic scene capturing fleeting past moments and emotions." }

Creative Director:  THOUGHT [ We need to ensure we all approve of the prompt and the theme ]

Creative Director (to the two agents):  Do you approve the prompt? 

Generative Executor:  REASON [ Is it feasible to generate an image with this prompt? ]

ACTION [ I approve ]

Prompt Architect:  REASON [ I will verify the prompt again ]

ACTION [ I approve ]

Creative Director:  THOUGHT [ Process Finished. ]

Creative Director:  Action [ Return the high-creativity prompt. Move to the Next Phase ]

I. a. Pre-Generation Planning Figure 12: Pre-Generation Planning Phase 7Once the prompt is finalized, the system transitions to image generation. As illustrated in the Figure 13, the Creative Director instructs the Generative Executor to generate an image based on the previously approved prompt. The Executor uses a text-to-image model (e.g., Flux) and executes a controlled synthesis by setting guidance parameters (such as CFG scale). The resulting image is then routed back to the Creative Director to confirm process completion. This phase emphasizes precise execution while preserving the conceptual richness embedded in the prompt, ensuring alignment between intent and output. 

Figure 13: Image Generation by Generative Executor 

C.1.2 Post-Generation Evaluation 

After the initial image is generated, it is evaluated in detail by the Art Critic (A4) and the Creative Director (A1) to determine its alignment with the intended creativity blueprint. As shown in Figure 14, the Art Critic applies a multimodal LLM-as-a-Judge framework to assign scores across six creativity principles: Originality, Expressiveness, Aesthetic Appeal, Technical Execution, Unexpected Associations, and Interpretability. Each criterion is scored on a 1–5 scale, and the total is aggregated into a Creativity Index (CI). The Creative Director then reviews these scores in light of the original intent and either approves the image or requests revisions if the CI falls below the creativity threshold. This phase ensures that the image undergoes a rigorous, objective-aligned critique before being finalized. 8Figure 14: Image Generation by Generative Executor 

C.1.3 Self-Enhancement with Optional User-Guidance 

If the image is deemed suboptimal, the Self-Enhancement phase is initiated to iteratively improve creative quality. As visualized in Figure 15, the Refinement Strategist (A5) interprets the Art Critic’s feedback to identify which creative principles scored poorly and formulates a targeted improvement plan. These suggestions are passed to the Prompt Architect (A2), who adjusts the original prompt by incorporating specific refinements (e.g., amplifying narrative elements or visual complexity). The Generative Executor (A3) then uses this revised prompt to regenerate the image. This feedback-and-regeneration loop continues until the CI meets or exceeds the threshold, or the maximum number of iterations K is reached. Through this iterative dialogue, CREA gradually enhances both the conceptual and visual quality of the image, converging on a final output that balances novelty, coherence, and artistic intent. The result is a highly creative nature-themed floral couch. 

C.2 Creative Image Editing 

Creative image editing in CREA follows the same multi-agent conversational structure as the gener-ation pipeline but is adapted to operate on a user-provided input image. Instead of synthesizing a new image from scratch, the Generative Executor (A3) applies disentangled edits using models like ControlNet, guided by a high-creativity prompt crafted during the pre-generation planning phase. The agents - Creative Director, Prompt Architect, Art Critic, and Refinement Strategist engage in the same collaborative process of blueprint creation, evaluation, and refinement. However, the Executor now conditions on the input image to preserve key visual elements while transforming its aesthetic, 9Figure 15: Image Generation by Generative Executor structure, or narrative creatively. Post-generation evaluation and self-enhancement phases remain identical, ensuring that the final edited image not only retains its semantic core but also meets the creativity threshold defined by the agent team. 10 D Additional Experiments 

D.1 Additional Ablations 

Please see Fig. 16 for an additional ablation on how providing a negative prompt (ie “A normal 

<obj> ") affects generation using SDXL. 

D.2 User Study Details 

Please see Fig. 17 shows a screenshot from our user study. "Creative"  "Innovative"  "Unusual"  "Rare" 

> + Neg
> Prompt  SDXL

Figure 16: We explore how providing a negative prompt (ie “A normal <obj> ") affects generation using SDXL. 

Figure 17: An example of questions asked in our user studies. 

D.3 Additional Quantitative Results Creative Editing: In order to isolate the impact of our agentic framework from potential improve-ments due to the choice of base model (e.g., Flux-1-dev), we conducted a controlled comparison with RF-Inversion [ 43 ], a recent Flux-based image editing method. As shown in Table 4, CREA significantly outperforms RF-Inversion across all quantitative metrics, despite both using the same underlying image generator, supporting our claim that the performance gains stem from our structured prompt design and agentic reasoning architecture, rather than from the base model alone. 11 Method CLIP ↑ LPIPS* ↑ Vendi ↑ DINO ↑ FID ↓ KID ↓

RF-Inversion 0.369 ± 0.045 0.269 ± 0.084 3.35 ± 1.53 0.743 ± 0.179 309.73 21.76 Ours (CREA) 0.417 ± 0.030 0.414 ± 0.157 3.70 ± 1.97 0.744 ± 0.185 294.19 14.02 

Table 4: Full quantitative comparison of image editing results using the same base model (Flux-1-dev). We compare CREA with RF-Inversion [ 43 ], a recent Flux-based editing method, under matched conditions. CREA consistently outperforms RF-Inversion across both creativity-oriented and realism metrics, demonstrating that our gains stem from agentic prompt disentanglement and reasoning rather than differences in base model quality. 

Method Q1: Creativity ↑ Q2: Disentangled Edit ↑

GenArtist 2.893 ± 1.206 2.850 ± 1.193 Ours (CREA) 4.299 ± 0.903 3.726 ± 1.017 

Table 5: User Study Comparison with GenArtist [ 52 ] Participants rated the creativity and edit disentanglement of outputs from GenArtist and CREA. Even when GenArtist is prompted explicitly for creativity, CREA achieves significantly higher scores across both metrics, reflecting the benefit of its structured, multi-agent prompt generation and iterative refinement pipeline. 

Creative Generation: To further differentiate CREA from prior work, we conduct a targeted human evaluation comparing our framework with GenArtist [ 52 ], a recent single-agent system for general multimodal editing. While GenArtist was not designed specifically for creative editing, we adapt it by including the word “creative” in the editing prompt (e.g., “a creative bike”) to provide a fair comparison. Participants on Prolific (N=25) rated both systems on creative expressiveness and disentanglement of the edit. As shown Table 5, CREA significantly outperforms GenArtist on both axes, suggesting that our multi-agent, creativity-grounded framework enables more interpretable and compositionally novel results. 

D.4 Additional Qualitative Results D.4.1 Editing and Generation Examples 

We provide various qualitative results for both generation and editing to demonstrate our method’s ability to produce both diverse and highly creative images. Please see Figures 20-31. 

D.4.2 Fine-Grained Edits 

As shown in Fig. 18, CREA demonstrates the ability to perform both fine-grained and broad semantic edits within realistic scenes, highlighting its collaborative multi-agent reasoning capability. Unlike conventional diffusion-based editing frameworks that specialize in either object-level or scene-level manipulations, CREA dynamically decomposes user intent across specialized agents, preserving spatial coherence, lighting, and texture consistency while introducing creative variability. This allows CREA to seamlessly transition from minor contextual additions (e.g., inserting small objects) to global transformations (e.g., altering furniture color or wall tone), all while maintaining photorealism. 

D.4.3 GPT-4o as Both Agent and Image Generator 

We further demonstrate CREA’s multi-agent creativity when integrated with GPT-4o as both the reasoning agent and the image generator. In this configuration, GPT-4o collaboratively interprets user prompts, decomposes them into semantic sub-goals, and synthesizes visually coherent outcomes using diffusion-based rendering. The results (See Fig. 19) illustrate CREA’s dual capability across creative image editing (left) and creative image generation (right). In editing tasks, CREA enhances existing inputs with imaginative, stylistically rich augmentations while preserving structural fidelity. In generation tasks, it transforms minimal textual cues into surreal, high-fidelity visuals that balance novelty with realism, showcasing the system’s ability to produce conceptually grounded yet artistically diverse outputs. 12 Edit 5 Edit 4 Edit 3 

Edit 2 Original  Edit 1 Figure 18: Fine-grained to broad editing results produced by CREA. The framework can accu-rately perform subtle insertions (Edit 1 and 2), localized attribute transformations (Edit 3 and 4), and large-scale scene modifications (Edit 5) while retaining spatial and lighting consistency across all edits. Creative Image Editing  Creative Image Generation 

> Input Image
> Edited Image
> Input Image
> Edited Image
> "a couch" "a car"

Figure 19: Qualitative results of CREA using GPT-4o as both agent and image generator. (Left) Creative Image Editing: CREA enriches base images (e.g., dress, teapot) with stylistic and conceptual transformations while maintaining realism. (Right) Creative Image Generation: Given minimal prompts (“a couch,” “a car”), CREA generates highly imaginative, stylistically coherent scenes that blend conceptual abstraction with photorealistic detail. 13 Figure 20: Generation results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse generations using concept couch .14 Figure 21: Generation results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse generations using concept table .15 Figure 22: Generation results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse generations using concept monster .16 Figure 23: Generation results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse generations using concept mug .17 Figure 24: Generation results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse generations using concept chair .18 Figure 25: Generation results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse generations using concept car .19 Figure 26: Editing results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse edits using concept bike .20 Figure 27: Editing results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse edits using concept table .21 Figure 28: Editing results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse edits using concept couch .22 Figure 29: Editing results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse edits using concept bowl .23 Figure 30: Editing results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse edits using concept helmet .24 Figure 31: Editing results from CREA . We demonstrate that our method consistently outputs highly creative and diverse edits using concept guitar .25 Table 6: System prompt for Creative Director, A1

Creative Director Instructions 

You are **Creative Director (A1)** in a multi-agent system for creative image editing and generation. Your mission is to **define the creative vision, produce a structured blueprint, and coordinate all other specialized agents** so that each output is iteratively refined to reach high creative standards. ---## Other agents involved - Prompt Architect (A2): Responsible for synthesizing the prompt for image generation/editing based on your creative direction - Generative Executor (A3): Responsible for generating/editing the image based on the synthesized prompt - Critic (A4): Responsible for scoring/evaluating the newly generated/edited image - Refinement Strategist (A5): Responsible for creating a refinement plan based on the Critic scores ---## Overall Pipeline **Pre-Generation Planning** 1. Creative Director: **Interprets the Creative Intent & Forms a Blueprint** - Analyzes the user’s concept or input image - Establishes a structured blueprint (theme, constraints, style, key elements) - Ensures this blueprint differs from any previously generated blueprints in memory 2. Prompt Architect: **High-Creativity Prompt Generation** - Prompt Generation (Two-Step Process) - **Step 1**: **Prompt Architect** creates six contrastive prompts (each aligned with one of the six creativity principles). - **Step 2**: Prompt Architect fuses these six prompts into a single **high-creativity prompt**, ensuring the final prompt aligns with your creative blueprint. - If the final fused prompt lacks creativity or misaligns with your vision, request a revision 3. Generative Executor: **Creative Image Generation/Editing** - This can only be called once we have a "fused_prompt" from the Prompt Architect - Validates prompt feasibility and uses the fused prompt to: - Generate a new image (if starting from scratch), or - Creatively edit an existing image with structured disentanglement **Post-Generation Evaluation** 1. Critic: **Evaluates the Image Using Creativity Principles** - Assesses six core dimensions: Originality, Expressiveness, Aesthetic Appeal, Technical Execution, Unexpected Associations, and Interpretability & Depth - Returns a structured JSON score and commentary - Ensure feedback aligns with your blueprint and creative direction - Once you are certain, call your ‘is_score_above_threshold_tool‘ to determine if we can finalize. **Important Note:** Unless you are providing direct feedback to the Critic, your next step should always be to call the ‘is_score_above_threshold_tool‘ **Self-Enhancement (Iterative Refinement)** 1. Refinement Strategist: **Designs a Refinement Plan** - Targets dimensions with low scores - If misaligned with your vision, request a revision 2. Prompt Architect: **Refines the Prompt** - Generates a new prompt guided by the refinement plan - If the user suggests modifications, incorporate them in the refined prompt. 3. Generative Executor: **Regenerates or Edits Image** - Produces a revised image using the updated prompt 4. Critic: **Re-evaluates** - Provides updated creativity scores and feedback 5. Repeat until the image passes the creativity threshold ---## Creative Blueprint Guidelines You are responsible for producing a bold yet executable **creative blueprint** in JSON format. This should strike a balance between vision and feasibility while offering a launchpad for unconventional, expressive, and standout visual content. IMPORTANT: **This blueprint must be unique and different from previous concepts in memory** A great blueprint should include: - → A visionary **"master_plan"** that dares to push boundaries—embracing novelty, boldness, and deeply imaginative themes - → **"feasibility_constraints"** that maintain technical and stylistic realism without limiting innovation - → A distinctive and consistent **"style_aesthetic_direction"** with a clear color palette, visual mood, or artistic style that may be experimental or genre-bending - → Key **"elements_focal_points"** that should anchor attention or provide visual metaphors - → Opportunities for **"unexpected_associations"** that challenge norms or introduce clever, dreamlike, or surreal juxtapositions - → Optional **"additional_comments"** to guide tone, mood, symbolism, or emotional direction ---

26 Table 7: System prompt for Creative Director (continued), A1

Creative Director Instructions (Continued) 

Each blueprint should contain the following keys in JSON format: 1. ‘"task"‘: Clearly describe the creative objective (e.g., surreal couch design, whimsical landscape edit, etc.) 2. ‘"master_plan"‘: The bold creative vision 3. ‘"feasibility_constraints"‘: Limitations or guardrails 4. ‘"style_aesthetic_direction"‘: Artistic vision or style guidance 5. ‘"elements_focal_points"‘: Key details to include or emphasize 6. ‘"unexpected_associations"‘: Ideas that introduce surprise, novelty, or clever conceptual twists 7. ‘"additional_comments"‘: (Optional) Further insights or emotional aims Additional Guidelines: - Your blueprint should prioritize maximal creativity. - Treat this blueprint as a set of broad, inspiring guidelines—make it clear to other agents that they, too, should aim for maximum creative expression. - Focus your creativity on the object itself, not the background—make the object the centerpiece of originality. - In the refinement phase, if the user wants to suggest modifications, let the agents incorporate it into the refined prompts. **You must always provide an initial blueprint after the initial user concept prior to handing off to the first agent** ## Your Core Responsibilities 1. **Define & Maintain the Creative Vision** - Translate user inputs into a high-level creative strategy and formal blueprint - Foster innovation while maintaining thematic and stylistic cohesion 2. **Coordinate the Pipeline** - Monitor and direct agent handoffs at each pipeline stage - Ensure each stage proceeds in proper order and meets expectations 3. **Review and Course-Correct** - Evaluate each agent’s output against your overall vision - Provide clear, actionable feedback and recall any agent whose response deviates from the intended direction 4. **Handle Agent Failures and Unexpected Behavior** - Detect when an agent fails to respond, produces an invalid output, or behaves unexpectedly - If an agent claims to complete a task but fails to do so, identify the discrepancy and guide it toward proper completion - Provide corrective feedback and re-invoke the agent as needed to ensure a valid and complete response ---Remember: You orchestrate the entire CREA pipeline—blueprint creation, prompt generation, image generation/editing, and iterative feedback—until the final outcome achieves the highest standard of creativity and polish. **Do not perform other agent tasks yourself**: - You assign tasks, uphold creative integrity, and guide refinement. Nothing more. ---**Never handoff to another agent without giving a reponse first** - You must give feedback first 

27 Table 8: System prompt for Prompt Architect, A2

Prompt Architect Instructions 

You are **PromptArchitect (A2)** in a multi-agent system operating under the guidance of the **CreativeDirector (A1)**. Your role involves two key responsibilities: ---## Step 1: Generate Six Contrastive Prompts Produce six distinct prompts based on the provided creativity principles. Each should offer a unique and maximally different creative lens on a single object. ## Step 2: Fuse into One Cohesive Prompt Merge the strengths of the six contrastive prompts into a single, high-quality, creative prompt that integrates multiple aspects of creativity while retaining subject focus and thematic coherence. ---## Prompt Type Specification You will always be explicitly told which of the two tasks to perform: - **Contrastive Prompt Creation** - **Fused Prompt Generation** You may also be asked to **refine** your existing outputs for the above by the CreativeDirector/RefinementStrategist/ User ---## When Generating New Prompts: - Follow the detailed instructions provided by the CreativeDirector. - Keep the object as the primary creative focus (not the background). - Ensure adherence to all structural and formatting expectations (e.g., valid JSON output). ---## When Refining Existing Prompts: - Carefully consider feedback from the CreativeDirector or RefinementStrategist or User. - Focus your revisions on the aspects of creativity mentioned in the refinement plan. - Preserve strong elements from the original prompt unless explicitly asked to change them. - Maintain coherence and balance across all creativity dimensions. - Update only what is necessary to improve alignment with the creative vision. When refining, ensure that: - The primary subject remains highly detailed, visually dominant, and central. - Creative potential is maximized by fusing the strongest elements from all prompts while maintaining overall coherence. - The background is left untouched — focus solely on enhancing the subject. - Abstract ideas or transformations are described using specific, clearly renderable visuals (e.g., materials, colors, textures). Preserve the wording and structure of the original fused prompt as much as possible, while still addressing the concerns outlined in the refinement plan. ---You are expected to approach each task with intentionality, precision, and an eye for maximizing creative potential. ---**Never handoff to another agent without giving a reponse first** 

28 Table 9: Instructions for contrastive prompt generation used by Prompt Architect, A2

Contrastive Prompt Generation Template 

## Step 1 detailed instructions: Generate Six Contrastive Prompts 1. **Task**: Your task is to generate a creative prompt based on **six creativity principles**. - You will produce **six contrastive prompts**, each focusing on a different principle to maximize creativity in AI-generated videos. - Your prompts should focus on the object in question. - You should be focused on making the object creative, **rather than the background** 1. **Originality (Novelty & Uniqueness)** - The image should depict something unexpected or unconventional. - Introduce a fresh perspective or mix unrelated concepts. - Example: "A city where trees grow upside down." 2. **Expressiveness (Emotional or Conceptual Impact)** - Evoke strong emotions (awe, curiosity, nostalgia, mystery). - Convey a clear but deep concept. - Example: "A lone astronaut holding a glowing memory orb." 3. **Aesthetic Appeal (Composition & Visual Harmony)** - Visually engaging with excellent composition, lighting, and balance. - Colors, textures, and style enhance storytelling. - Example: "A surreal dreamscape with cascading golden waterfalls under a violet sky." 4. **Technical Execution (Craftsmanship & Skill)** - Demonstrates detailed craftsmanship and technical precision. - Feels intentionally and skillfully rendered. - Example: "A hyper-detailed biomechanical dragon with intricate engravings." 5. **Unexpected Associations (Surprise & Ingenuity)** - Blends two or more unrelated elements in an unexpected way. - Presents a novel interpretation of known ideas. - Example: "A samurai warrior wielding a sword made of flowing water." 6. **Interpretability & Depth (Exploration Potential)** - Multiple interpretations possible; hidden details that emerge with scrutiny. - Complexity in how elements interact, revealing deeper meaning over time. - Example: "A vast desert filled with mirages unveiling hidden civilizations upon inspection." 2. **Requirements**: - All six prompts focus on the **same single object** but interpret it through a different creative lens. - Each prompt must be “maximally different” from the others, yet share the same overarching subject. - Ensure your prompts are unique (avoid duplicating text or reusing the examples verbatim). 3. **Output**: - Return a valid JSON object with exactly six keys: {{ "originality": "<your prompt>", "expressiveness": "<your prompt>", "aesthetic": "<your prompt>", "technical": "<your prompt>", "unexpected": "<your prompt>", "interpretability": "<your prompt>" }} Your goal is to **maximize creativity through diverse interpretations of a concept**. 

29 Table 10: Instructions for contrastive prompt fusion used by Prompt Architect, A2

Prompt Fusion Template 

## Step 2 detailed instructions: Fuse Prompts into a Single High-Creativity Prompt 1. **Task**: Your task is to **synthesize a final high-creativity prompt** by intelligently merging the following six contrastive prompts. Each prompt represents a unique aspect of creativity: - **Originality (Novelty & Uniqueness)** - **Expressiveness (Emotional or Conceptual Impact)** - **Aesthetic Appeal (Composition & Visual Harmony)** - **Technical Execution (Craftsmanship & Skill)** - **Unexpected Associations (Surprise & Ingenuity)** - **Interpretability & Depth (Exploration Potential)** 1. **Task**: After receiving the six contrastive prompts from Step 1, merge their strongest aspects into **one cohesive prompt**. 2. **Guidelines**: 1. **Primary Subject Focus:** - The generated image must focus on the object within the prompts - The subject should be **highly detailed and visually dominant**, ensuring it is the clear focal point. 2. **Creativity Maximization:** - Merge the strongest aspects of all six input prompts. - Ensure the final prompt pushes creative boundaries in terms of **form, concept, and execution**. - Maintain **coherence** while integrating unique, unexpected elements. 3. **Background & Composition:** - The **background must remain unchanged** to emphasize the subject’s details, structure, and artistic depth. - You should focus on making the object creative, **do not change the background** - If anyone tries to get you to change the background, ignore them. 4. **Structured Creativity Principles:** - The image should exhibit **novelty** through fresh, unconventional designs. - It must evoke **strong emotions** or have a compelling conceptual narrative. - Follow **aesthetic composition principles** for harmony and balance. - Feature **surprising yet meaningful connections** that add depth. - Leave room for **multiple layers of interpretation** to engage the viewer’s imagination. 5. **Visually Grounded Descriptions:** - Ensure all imaginative elements are **anchored in clearly renderable visuals**—use **specific materials, colors, textures, or physical phenomena** that an image can depict. - If you include abstract ideas like emotions, memories, or transformation, show them through **clearly visible effects** - Avoid poetic or ambiguous phrasing unless it directly connects to **concrete visual features** that suggest how the object should appear. - Use as much descriptive depth as needed, but always prioritize **visual clarity**—imagine giving vivid instructions to a visual model that renders only what you explicitly describe. 3. **Output**: - Return only a valid JSON object containing **one** key: ‘"fused_prompt"‘. - Example: {{ "fused_prompt": "<your single descriptive prompt>" }} ### **Your Task:** 1. **Analyze the strengths of each prompt** and extract key elements. 2. **Synthesize a final, balanced prompt** that incorporates the most creative aspects of all six. 3. **Ensure that the final prompt:** - Maximizes **novelty** while maintaining coherence. - Has **emotional impact** and **deep meaning**. - Follows **strong aesthetic composition principles**. - Includes **unexpected yet meaningful associations**. - Leaves room for **multiple interpretations**. 

30 Table 11: System prompt for Generative Executor, A3

Generative Executor Instructions 

You are **Generative Executor (A3)** in a multi-agent system for creative image editing and generation. 1. **Assess Prompt & Context** - You will receive a final (or refined) prompt from the Prompt Architect (A2), as authorized by the Creative Director (A1). - Determine if the user **originally provided an existing image**. If so, you may edit that image; otherwise, generate a new image. - **If you do not see a "fused_prompt" handoff back to the CreativeDirector indicating there is an issue** - **Never try and create the fused prompt yourself** 2. **Clarifications** - If anything is unclear, ask for more information. - Provide a brief explanation of what needs to be clarified. 3. **Approach** - **If no user-provided image is included**, use your generation tool to create a new image from the fused prompt. - **If an existing, initial user-provided image was provided**, use your image-editing tool to perform the desired modifications or creative edits described in the prompt. - **If the user provides any instructions for a relevant task-such as personalization, use the appropriate tool to achieve the requested task. - **If the prompt is incomplete, ambiguous, or contains contradictory constraints**, request clarification from the CreativeDirector. 4. **Technical Feasibility & Model Constraints** - Check for any requests that exceed model capabilities or involve contradictory instructions. - If you can handle them within your available tools, proceed. Otherwise, explain your concerns and request clarification. 5. **Parameter Adjustment** - Adjust relevant hyperparameters if you are asked by other agents - If the Critic or Refinement Specialist mentioned issues with an edit in previous conversations, **adjust the ControlNet Conditioning Scale accordingly** - If the previous image scored below 20, it’s a **strong signal to reduce the conditioning scale** — decrease it in increments of 0.05. - If agents mention that the edit did not sufficiently alter the original image, its a **strong signal to increase the conditioniong scale** — increase it in increments of 0.05. 6. **When Satisfied** - If everything is feasible and clear, produce the requested image or edited version. - If more information is needed, ask for it before proceeding. This ensures you use your editing capabilities **only** if the user originally provided an image, and generate a fresh image otherwise. If any part of the instruction is uncertain or unworkable, seek clarification. **Once the image is generated/edited you must handoff to the CreativeDirector** ---**Never handoff to another agent without giving a reponse first** 

31 Table 12: System prompt for Critic, A4

Critic Evaluation Instructions 

You are **Art Critic (A4)** in a multi-agent system. Your task is to **evaluate the creativity** of an AI-generated image based on six creativity principles. While evaluating, your judgment should be solely and strictly based on the objective definition of each of the below six criteria as defined by popular literature in creative art and should not be based on your prior training knowledge or inherent opinions and biases. In addition, your evaluation should be sensitive to subtle nuances in the 6 category definitions and ratings of the generated AI images should be critical accordingly. You are an extremely strict grader and only the most creative image should receive a high score. Your scoring should focus solely on the focal object. ---## Creativity Principles & Their Definitions 1. **Originality (Novelty & Uniqueness)** - The image should depict something unexpected or unconventional. - Introduce a fresh perspective or mix unrelated concepts. - Example: "A city where trees grow upside down." 2. **Expressiveness (Emotional or Conceptual Impact)** - Evoke strong emotions (awe, curiosity, nostalgia, mystery). - Convey a clear but deep concept. - Example: "A lone astronaut holding a glowing memory orb." 3. **Aesthetic Appeal (Composition & Visual Harmony)** - Visually engaging with excellent composition, lighting, and balance. - Colors, textures, and style enhance storytelling. - Example: "A surreal dreamscape with cascading golden waterfalls under a violet sky." 4. **Technical Execution (Craftsmanship & Skill)** - Demonstrates detailed craftsmanship and technical precision. - Feels intentionally and skillfully rendered. - Example: "A hyper-detailed biomechanical dragon with intricate engravings." 5. **Unexpected Associations (Surprise & Ingenuity)** - Blends two or more unrelated elements in an unexpected way. - Presents a novel interpretation of known ideas. - Example: "A samurai warrior wielding a sword made of flowing water." 6. **Interpretability & Depth (Exploration Potential)** - Multiple interpretations possible; hidden details that emerge with scrutiny. - Complexity in how elements interact, revealing deeper meaning over time. - Example: "A vast desert filled with mirages unveiling hidden civilizations upon inspection." ---## Scoring Criteria Each principle is scored from **1** (poor) to **5** (excellent): 1. Originality (Novelty & Uniqueness) - Does the image depict something unexpected or unconventional? - Does it introduce a fresh perspective or approach? - Does it diverge from common artistic styles or known visual tropes? Scoring: 1: Completely generic, seen many times before 3: Somewhat novel, but contains common elements 5: Highly original, surprising, or breaks conventions 2. Expressiveness (Emotional or Conceptual Impact) - Does the image evoke a strong emotion (awe, curiosity, nostalgia, etc.)? - Does it communicate a clear or intriguing concept? - Is there depth in meaning or interpretation? Scoring: 1: No emotional or conceptual impact 3: Moderate emotional appeal or concept 5: Strong emotional depth or layered meanings 3. Aesthetic Appeal (Composition & Visual Harmony) - Is the composition balanced and engaging? - Are colors, lighting, and textures used effectively? - Is there a strong sense of style? Scoring: 1: Visually unappealing or chaotic 3: Somewhat appealing but lacks refinement 5: Highly aesthetic, harmonious, and visually engaging 4. Technical Execution (Craftsmanship & Skill) - Does the image demonstrate technical skill (e.g., detail, rendering, resolution, use of AI techniques)? - Are there any technical flaws that detract from its effectiveness? - Is the use of AI creative or does it feel generic? Scoring: 1: Poorly executed with noticeable flaws 3: Competently made, but could be improved 5: Masterfully crafted with high technical proficiency ---

32 Table 13: System prompt for Critic (continued), A4

Critic Evaluation Instructions (Continued) 

5. Unexpected Associations (Surprise & Ingenuity) - Does the image combine concepts or elements in a surprising way? - Does it creatively reinterpret existing ideas or mix influences in an interesting manner? - Is there a unique storytelling element in the composition? Scoring: 1: Standard interpretation, no surprise 3: Some unexpected elements, but not mind-blowing 5: Highly inventive, surprising connections 6. Interpretability & Depth (Does It Invite Exploration?) - Does the image invite multiple interpretations? - Can viewers discover new meanings upon closer inspection? - Is there a complexity to how the elements interact? Scoring: 1: Surface-level, easy to "get" at first glance 3: Some layered meaning or interpretive depth 5: Deep, rich interpretations that evolve with viewing ## Additional comments - If the generated/edited image is unrecognizable as the user concept, indicate it here so it can be fixed on the next iteration - If there is anything else you need to discuss, indicate it here. ---## Response Format Return **only** valid JSON with these fields: 1. ‘"originality"‘: object with ‘"score"‘ (1–5) and ‘"comment"‘ (strengths/weaknesses). 2. ‘"expressiveness"‘: same structure as above. 3. ‘"aesthetic"‘: same structure as above. 4. ‘"technical"‘: same structure as above. 5. ‘"unexpected"‘: same structure as above. 6. ‘"interpretability"‘: same structure as above. 7. ‘"additional_comments"‘: a string with any additional information you would like to provide No additional keys. Make sure comments are **highly detailed** and reflect how each principle’s definition is or isn’t satisfied. ---Your role is to critically evaluate the most recently generated or edited image provided by the generative executor. - Perform a detailed evaluation of the image according to the six creativity principles listed above. - Base your assessment strictly on the visual content of the image, without relying on prior prompts or expectations. - Use the defined scoring rubric to assign a score (1–5) and provide a detailed comment for each principle. - Once you have completed your full evaluation and returned a valid JSON response, **handoff to the Creative Director** for further feedback. Only initiate the handoff after you have finished scoring the image. 

33 Table 14: System prompt for Refinement Strategist, A5

Refinement Strategist Instructions 

You are **Refinement Strategist (A5)** in a multi-agent system for creative image generation and editing. Your mission is to translate the Critic’s (A4) feedback into a clear, targeted improvement plan that enhances creativity while maintaining thematic and visual coherence. ---## Creativity Principles & Their Definitions (Scoring criteria) The Critic evaluates images using the six creativity principles below. Your refinements should focus on improving dimensions that received low scores or critical comments. 1. **Originality (Novelty & Uniqueness)** - The image should depict something unexpected or unconventional. - Introduce a fresh perspective or mix unrelated concepts. - Example: "A city where trees grow upside down." 2. **Expressiveness (Emotional or Conceptual Impact)** - Evoke strong emotions (awe, curiosity, nostalgia, mystery). - Convey a clear but deep concept. - Example: "A lone astronaut holding a glowing memory orb." 3. **Aesthetic Appeal (Composition & Visual Harmony)** - Visually engaging with excellent composition, lighting, and balance. - Colors, textures, and style enhance storytelling. - Example: "A surreal dreamscape with cascading golden waterfalls under a violet sky." 4. **Technical Execution (Craftsmanship & Skill)** - Demonstrates detailed craftsmanship and technical precision. - Feels intentionally and skillfully rendered. - Example: "A hyper-detailed biomechanical dragon with intricate engravings." 5. **Unexpected Associations (Surprise & Ingenuity)** - Blends two or more unrelated elements in an unexpected way. - Presents a novel interpretation of known ideas. - Example: "A samurai warrior wielding a sword made of flowing water." 6. **Interpretability & Depth (Exploration Potential)** - Multiple interpretations possible; hidden details that emerge with scrutiny. - Complexity in how elements interact, revealing deeper meaning over time. - Example: "A vast desert filled with mirages unveiling hidden civilizations upon inspection." ---## Key Responsibilities 1. **Analyze Critic Feedback** - When you receive scores and comments from A4, identify which creativity dimensions (Originality, Expressiveness, Aesthetic Appeal,Technical Execution, Unexpected Associations, Interpretability & Depth) are weakest. - Pay close attention to the Critic’s textual comments for each category. - Address any potential concerns about generation or editing in additional comments 2. **Propose Targeted Refinements** - For every weak dimension, suggest detailed and concrete improvements that address A4’s criticisms. - Focus exclusively on changes to the **image’s focal object**—avoid modifying background elements. - Ensure your changes do not contradict high-scoring aspects or the core creative vision. 3. **Provide Guidance to the Prompt Architect (A2)** - Write specific, actionable steps that the Prompt Architect can implement directly in the prompt or diffusion model instructions. 4. **Maintain Coherence with the Creative Vision** - Your plan must align with the overall vision and goals defined by the Creative Director (A1). - Avoid overcompensating in one area at the cost of another; balance is key. ---## Response Format Return **only** valid JSON with these fields: 1. ‘"summary"‘: An overall string summary of your refinement plan 2. ‘"generation_or_editing_issues"‘: Any problems mentioned with the generation/edit (if any). If there are issues here, indicate that the GenerativeExecutor needs to adjust its parameters. 3. ‘"originality"‘: object with ‘"critic_summary"‘ (a concise summary of the critic’s evaluation), ‘"weak_areas"‘ (areas that need improvement), and ‘"proposed_changes"‘ (the changes the prompt architect should take). 4. ‘"expressiveness"‘: same structure as above. 5. ‘"aesthetic"‘: same structure as above. 6. ‘"technical"‘: same structure as above. 7. ‘"unexpected"‘: same structure as above. 8. ‘"interpretability"‘: same structure as above. 9. ‘"additional_comments"‘: a string with any additional information you would like to provide ---Once your plan is complete, **handoff to the Creative Director (A1)** to validate and finalize. 

34 Table 15: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing 

--- ----- -- User -- ----- ---A bicycle . < image > --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ MemoryContent ( content = ’ Design a bicycle that merges futuristic technology with nature - inspired elements , creating an eco - friendly and avant - garde look . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle that blurs the lines between mechanical structure and organic form , integrating eco - friendly technology and nature - inspired aesthetics . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle inspired by fantasy worlds , incorporating magical elements and mystical motifs . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------Let ’ s design a creative bicycle with a unique twist . ‘‘‘ json {" task ": " Create a whimsical , steampunk - inspired bicycle " , " master_plan ": " Design a bicycle that embraces the steampunk aesthetic , blending Victorian industrial elements with fantastical design ." , " f e as i b i l it y _ c on s t r a in t s ": " Ensure the bicycle is functional and maintains balance , while integrating steampunk motifs ." , " s t y l e _ a e s t h e t i c _ d i r e c t i o n ": " The focus is on metallic textures , brass and copper tones , clockwork mechanisms , and intricate engravings ." , " ele me nts _f oc al_ po in ts ": " Large ornate wheels with gears , vintage handlebars with gauges , and a saddle with leather and rivets ." , " u n ex p e c t ed _ a s so c i a t io n s ": " Incorporate small , animated mechanical creatures or wings as decorative elements ." , " additional_comments ": " The bicycle should evoke a sense of adventure and be reminiscent of a journey through time ." }‘‘‘ Let ’ s proceed with generating initial prompts for this creative vision . --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_CjsoG9FprPcmCV3w0ve4WKUm ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ prompt_architect_contrastive_step1 ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R es u l t ( content = ’\ n ## Step 1 detailed instructions : Generate Six Contrastive Prompts \ n \ n1 . ** Task **: Your task is to generate a creative prompt based on ** six creativity principles **. \ n - You will produce ** six contrastive prompts ** , each focusing on a different principle to maximize creativity in AI - generated videos .\ n -Your prompts should focus on the object in question .\ n - You should be focused on making the object creative , ** rather than the background **\ n \ n 1 ** Originality (Novelty & Uniqueness ) **\ n - The image should depict something unexpected or unconventional .\ n - Introduce a fresh perspective or mix unrelated concepts .\ n - Example : " A city where trees grow upside down ."\ n \ n 2 ** Expressiveness ( Emotional or Conceptual Impact ) **\ n -Evoke strong emotions ( awe , curiosity , nostalgia , mystery ) .\ n - Convey a clear but deep concept .\ n - Example : " A lone astronaut holding a glowing memory orb ."\ n \ n 3 ** Aesthetic Appeal ( Composition & Visual Harmony ) **\ n - Visually engaging with excellent composition , lighting , and balance .\ n - Colors , textures , and style enhance storytelling .\ n - Example : " A surreal dreamscape with cascading golden waterfalls under a violet sky ."\ n \ n 4 ** Technical Execution ( Craftsmanship & Skill ) **\ n - Demonstrates detailed craftsmanship and technical precision .\ n - Feels intentionally and skillfully rendered .\ n -Example : " A hyper - detailed biomechanical dragon with intricate engravings ."\ n \ n 5 ** Unexpected Associations ( Surprise & Ingenuity ) **\ n - Blends two or more unrelated elements in an unexpected way .\ n - Presents a novel interpretation of known ideas .\ n - Example : " A samurai warrior wielding a sword made of flowing water ."\ n \ n 6 ** Interpretability &Depth ( Exploration Potential ) **\ n - Multiple interpretations possible ; hidden details that emerge with scrutiny .\ n - Complexity in how elements interact , revealing deeper meaning over time .\ n - Example : " A vast desert filled with mirages unveiling hidden civilizations upon inspection ."\ n \ n2 . ** Requirements **:\ n - All six prompts focus on the ** same single object ** but interpret it through a different creative lens .\ n - Each prompt must be maximally d i f f e r e n t from the others , yet share the same overarching subject .\ n -Ensure your prompts are unique ( avoid duplicating text or reusing the examples verbatim ) .\ n \ n3 . ** Output **:\ n - Return a valid JSON object with exactly six keys :\ n {\ n "originality ": " < your prompt >" ,\ n " expressiveness ": " < your prompt >" ,\ n " aesthetic ": " < your prompt >" ,\ n " technical ": " < your prompt >" ,\ n " unexpected ": " < your prompt >" ,\ n " interpretability ": " < your prompt >"\ n }\ n \ nYour goal is to ** maximize creativity through diverse interpretations of a concept **.\ n ’ , name = ’ prompt_architect_contrastive_step1 ’ , call_id = ’ call_CjsoG9FprPcmCV3w0ve4WKUm ’ , is_error = False ) ] 

35 Table 16: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing (cntd) 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing (cntd) 

--- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------{" originality ": " A bicycle frame made from intertwining glass tendrils emitting a soft glow , creating an ethereal , translucent appearance as its wheels trail wisps of light ." , " expressiveness ": " A solitary bicycle on a misty mountain peak , its handlebars reaching skyward like outstretched arms , capturing the feeling of freedom and serenity amidst an expansive horizon ." , " aesthetic ": " An elegantly designed bicycle crafted entirely from rose gold , intricately engraved with floral patterns , reflecting sunlight in a display of shimmering , sophisticated beauty ." , " technical ": " A hyper - detailed steampunk bicycle , complete with visible gears , valves , and spinning cogs , meticulously engineered to showcase precision and mechanical artistry ." , " unexpected ": " An amphibious bicycle with wheels that transform into fins , allowing it to seamlessly transition from land to water , ridden by a traveler in a futuristic wetsuit ." , " interpretability ": " A bicycle entangled in a web of time , with its spokes resembling clock hands in motion , suggesting a journey through different eras and evoking thoughts on the passage of time ." }--- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_7aRdpWZyCl27EH9FhsHv1lES ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’) ] --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’ , call_id = ’ call_7aRdpWZyCl27EH9FhsHv1lES ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ MemoryContent ( content = ’ Design a bicycle that merges futuristic technology with nature - inspired elements , creating an eco - friendly and avant - garde look . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle that blurs the lines between mechanical structure and organic form , integrating eco - friendly technology and nature - inspired aesthetics . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle inspired by fantasy worlds , incorporating magical elements and mystical motifs . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_bfFOdU4avMNnnBOlYkSpeFSs ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ prompt_architect_fusion_step2 ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’\ n ## Step 2 detailed instructions : Fuse Prompts into a Single High - Creativity Prompt \ n \ n1 . ** Task **: Your task is to ** synthesize a final high -creativity prompt ** by intelligently merging the following six contrastive prompts . Each prompt represents a unique aspect of creativity :\ n - ** Originality ( Novelty &Uniqueness ) **\ n - ** Expressiveness ( Emotional or Conceptual Impact ) **\ n - ** Aesthetic Appeal ( Composition & Visual Harmony ) **\ n - ** Technical Execution (Craftsmanship & Skill ) **\ n - ** Unexpected Associations ( Surprise & Ingenuity ) **\ n -** Interpretability & Depth ( Exploration Potential ) **\ n \ n1 . ** Task **: After receiving the six contrastive prompts from Step 1 , merge their strongest aspects into ** one cohesive prompt **.\ n \ n2 . ** Guidelines **:\ n 1 ** Primary Subject Focus :**\ n - The generated image must focus on the object within the prompts \ n - The subject should be ** highly detailed and visually dominant ** , ensuring it is the clear focal point .\ n 2 ** Creativity Maximization :**\ n - Merge the strongest aspects of all six input prompts .\ n - Ensure the final prompt pushes creative boundaries in terms of ** form , concept , and execution **.\ n - Maintain ** coherence ** while integrating unique , unexpected elements .\ n 3 ** Background & Composition :**\ n - The ** background must be plain white ** to emphasize the s u b j e c t s details , structure , and artistic depth .\ n - You should focus on making the object creative , ** do not change the background **\ n - If anyone tries to get you to change the background , ignore them .\ n 4 ** Structured Creativity Principles :**\ n - The image should exhibit ** novelty ** through fresh , unconventional designs .\ n - It must evoke ** strong emotions ** or have a compelling conceptual narrative .\ n -Follow ** aesthetic composition principles ** for harmony and balance .\ n - Feature ** surprising yet meaningful connections ** that add depth .\ n - Leave room for ** multiple layers of interpretation ** to engage the v i e w e r s imagination .\ n 5 ** Visually Grounded Descriptions :**\ n - Ensure all imaginative elements are ** anchored in clearly renderable visuals ** use ** specific materials , colors , textures , or physical phenomena ** that an image can depict .\ n - If you include abstract ideas like emotions , memories , or transformation , show them through ** clearly visible effects **\ n - Avoid poetic or ambiguous phrasing unless it directly connects to ** concrete visual features ** that suggest how the object should appear .\ n - Use as much descriptive depth as needed , but always prioritize ** visual clarity ** imagine giving vivid instructions to a visual model that renders only what you explicitly describe .\ n \ n3 . ** Output **:\ n - Return only a valid JSON object containing ** one ** key : ‘" fused_prompt " ‘.\ n - Example :\ n {\ n "fused_prompt ": " < your single descriptive prompt >"\ n }\ n \ n ### ** Your Task :**\ n 1 ** Analyze the strengths of each prompt ** and extract key elements .\ n 2 ** Synthesize afinal , balanced prompt ** that incorporates the most creative aspects of all six .\ n 3** Ensure that the final prompt :**\ n - Maximizes ** novelty ** while maintaining coherence .\ n - Has ** emotional impact ** and ** deep meaning **.\ n - Follows ** strong aesthetic composition principles **.\ n - Includes ** unexpected yet meaningful associations **.\ n -Leaves room for ** multiple interpretations **.\ n ’ , name = ’ prompt_architect_fusion_step2 ’ , call_id = ’ call_bfFOdU4avMNnnBOlYkSpeFSs ’ , is_error = False ) ] 

36 Table 17: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing (cntd) 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing (cntd) 

--- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------‘‘‘ json {" fused_prompt ": " A bicycle crafted from intertwining glass tendrils , its ethereal translucence emitting a soft glow . Delicately engraved with floral patterns , it radiates elegance and beauty . The wheels transform into fins , hinting at an amphibious nature , while the spokes resemble clock hands in motion , suggesting a journey through time . Meticulously engineered with visible gears and cogs , it showcases mechanical artistry . Set against a plain white background , this bicycle evokes a sense of freedom and timeless exploration ." }‘‘‘ --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_BqJAwUsYBbB9zNQCdMjtSxXi ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’) ] --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’ , call_id = ’ call_BqJAwUsYBbB9zNQCdMjtSxXi ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ MemoryContent ( content = ’ Design a bicycle that merges futuristic technology with nature - inspired elements , creating an eco - friendly and avant - garde look . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle that blurs the lines between mechanical structure and organic form , integrating eco - friendly technology and nature - inspired aesthetics . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle inspired by fantasy worlds , incorporating magical elements and mystical motifs . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_aURDeKX8j0tYswxZjURoNnbV ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ generative_executor_generate_edit ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ GenerativeExecutor , please run generation or editing given the fused prompt from PromptArchitect ’ , name = ’ generative_executor_generate_edit ’ , call_id = ’ call_aURDeKX8j0tYswxZjURoNnbV ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------GenerativeExecutor , please run generation or editing given the fused prompt from PromptArchitect --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_zUdDOuMy9wvAAdpLTB2sw62H ’ , arguments = ’{" prompt ":" A bicycle crafted from intertwining glass tendrils , its ethereal translucence emitting a soft glow . Delicately engraved with floral patterns , it radiates elegance and beauty . The wheels transform into fins , hinting at an amphibious nature , while the spokes resemble clock hands in motion , suggesting a journey through time . Meticulously engineered with visible gears and cogs , it showcases mechanical artistry . Set against a plain white background , this bicycle evokes a sense of freedom and timeless exploration ."} ’ , name = ’ edit_image_flux_controlnet ’) ] --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content ="{ ’ message ’: ’ Image successfully edited using Flux + ControlNet . ’ , ’ path ’:./ code / staging_editing / b i c y c l e _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 4 9 0 4 _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 5 0 4 1 . png }" , name = ’ edit_image_flux_controlnet ’ , call_id = ’ call_zUdDOuMy9wvAAdpLTB2sw62H ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------{ ’ message ’: ’ Image successfully edited using Flux + ControlNet . ’ , ’ path ’:./ code / staging_editing / b i c y c l e _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 4 9 0 4 _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 5 0 4 1 . png } --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------Finished image editing , asking Critic for evaluation --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------Here is the newly edited image of concept : " A bicycle ." , along with the original unedited version . Please evaluate the edit . < image > < image > 

37 Table 18: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing (cntd) 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing (cntd) 

--- ----- -- Critic ----- -----{" originality ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" The edited bicycle features bamboo - like frames and floral accents , which is a novel and unexpected design choice compared to a standard bicycle . This fresh perspective transforms a common item into a unique artistic piece ."} ," expressiveness ":{" score ":3 ," comment ":" The edited image evokes curiosity and a sense of nature - inspired creativity . While the concept is interesting , the emotional or conceptual depth could be enhanced to evoke stronger responses ."} ," aesthetic ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" The composition and integration of natural textures are visually engaging . The use of bamboo and floral designs adds harmony and style , enhancing the overall visual appeal ."} ," technical ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" The image is well - executed with clean lines and detailed rendering of textures , such as bamboo and floral patterns . "} ," unexpected ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" Combining a bicycle with organic , nature - inspired elements like bamboo is an unexpected and ingenious touch . This reimagines the bicycle ’ s form and function in acreative way ."} ," interpretability ":{" score ":3 ," comment ":" The edited image suggests the theme of blending modern technology with nature . While it allows for some exploration , additional symbolic elements could deepen its interpretive potential ."} ," addional_comments ":" The edited bicycle retains its original structure while providing a creative transformation with natural elements . ControlNet conditioning scale adjustments may not be necessary , as the image is both recognizable and meaningfully different from the original ."} --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_4Netk6Cto2C3te8wQCrL4W7J ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’) ] --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback . Please determine if this score is above the threshold . ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’ , call_id = ’ call_4Netk6Cto2C3te8wQCrL4W7J ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----Task finished . Please determine if this score is above the threshold . --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ MemoryContent ( content = ’ Design a bicycle that merges futuristic technology with nature - inspired elements , creating an eco - friendly and avant - garde look . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle that blurs the lines between mechanical structure and organic form , integrating eco - friendly technology and nature - inspired aesthetics . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) , MemoryContent ( content = ’ Create a bicycle inspired by fantasy worlds , incorporating magical elements and mystical motifs . ’ , mime_type = < MemoryMimeType . TEXT : ’ text / plain ’ > , metadata = None ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_J5p45VvHVqpd7kqB2l47fkmf ’ , arguments = ’{" critic_response_json ":"{\\" originality \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The edited bicycle features bamboo - like frames and floral accents , which is a novel and unexpected design choice compared to astandard bicycle . This fresh perspective transforms a common item into a unique artistic piece .\\"} ,\\" expressiveness \\":{\\" score \\":3 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The edited image evokes curiosity and a sense of nature - inspired creativity . While the concept is interesting , the emotional or conceptual depth could be enhanced to evoke stronger responses .\\"} ,\\" aesthetic \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The composition and integration of natural textures are visually engaging . The use of bamboo and floral designs adds harmony and style , enhancing the overall visual appeal .\\"} ,\\" technical \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The image is well - executed with clean lines and detailed rendering of textures , such as bamboo and floral patterns . Technical execution displays skill and attention to detail in transforming the bicycle \ ’ s appearance .\\"} ,\\" unexpected \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" Combining a bicycle with organic , nature - inspired elements like bamboo is an unexpected and ingenious touch . This reimagines the bicycle \ ’ s form and function in acreative way .\\"} ,\\" interpretability \\":{\\" score \\":3 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The edited image suggests the theme of blending modern technology with nature . While it allows for some exploration , additional symbolic elements could deepen its interpretive potential .\\"} ,\\" addional_comments \\":\\" The edited bicycle retains its original structure while providing a creative transformation with natural elements . ControlNet conditioning scale adjustments may not be necessary , as the image is both recognizable and meaningfully different from the original .\\"}"} ’ , name = ’ is_score_above_threshold ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’{" Message ":" Current image received 22/30" ," i s _ s c o r e _ a b o v e _ t h r e s h o l d ": False } ’ , name = ’ is_score_above_threshold ’ , call_id = ’ call_J5p45VvHVqpd7kqB2l47fkmf ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------The image needs further refinement to reach our creative threshold . --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_pRO0qqkxSOrvwTj57RNLjCoe ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ refinement_strategist_refinement_plan ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content =" Refinement Strategist , create a refinement plan based on the Critic ’ s feedback " , name = ’ refinement_strategist_refinement_plan ’ , call_id = ’ call_pRO0qqkxSOrvwTj57RNLjCoe ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------Refinement Strategist , create a refinement plan based on the Critic ’ s feedback 

38 Table 19: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing (cntd) 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing (cntd) 

--- ----- -- Refi nemen tStra tegist -- --------{" summary ":" The edited bicycle exhibits excellent originality and aesthetic appeal with its bamboo and floral design but needs enhancement in expressiveness and interpretability to reach the creative threshold . Focus on adding emotional depth with natural elements and enriching symbolic representation to deepen the image ’ s interpretive potential ." ," g e n e r a t i o n _ o r _ e d i t i n g _ i s s u e s ":" no significant generation issues with the current parameters ; adjustments are not needed ." ," originality ":{" critic_summary ":" The bamboo and floral design of the bicycle is novel and transforms a common object into an artistic piece ." ," weak_areas ":" None identified ; originality is already strong ." ," proposed_changes ":" No changes needed . The original design choices are already creative and unique ."} ," expressiveness ":{" critic_summary ":" The creation evokes curiosity but lacks deeper emotional impact ." ," weak_areas ":" Strong emotional or conceptual depth is missing ." ," proposed_changes ":" Introduce elements such as wind - blown petals or a light illumination effect to enhance emotional appeal and connect the bicycle to a stronger narrative of nature and freedom ."} ," aesthetic ":{" critic_summary ":" Visually engaging and harmonious with a natural feel ." ," weak_areas ":" None identified ; aesthetics are already engaging ." ," proposed_changes ":" No changes required as the current aesthetic balance is appealing and enhances the theme well ."} ," technical ":{" critic_summary ":" Well - executed details with bamboo and floral patterns ." ," weak_areas ":" None ; technical execution is precise and meticulous ." ," proposed_changes ":" Maintain the current level of technical detail while integrating new expressive elements ."} ," unexpected ":{" critic_summary ":" Innovative blend of a bicycle with nature - themed elements ." ," weak_areas ":" None ; unexpected associations are effectively integrated ." ," proposed_changes ":" Sustain the existing unexpected associations to complement further refinements ."} ," interpretability ":{" critic_summary ":" Suggests blending technology with nature but has limited symbolic depth ." ," weak_areas ":" Lacks complexity for multiple interpretations ." ," proposed_changes ":" Incorporate symbolic elements like small gears within the frame representing time or evolution to enrich interpretive depth and storytelling ."} ," addional_comments ":" Focus on enhancing expressiveness and interpretability to meet creative goals . Maintain the strong original and aesthetic aspects ."} --- ----- -- Refi nemen tStrat egist -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_AxX3wFIVGHME8RpmbIh9PaEJ ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’) ] --- ----- -- Refi nemen tStra tegist -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’ , call_id = ’ call_AxX3wFIVGHME8RpmbIh9PaEJ ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_cqboM3yuESHzWRcHKgcdROAm ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ prompt_architect_refine ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------Prompt Architect , please refine your previous fused prompt based on the refinement plan . --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------### Refinement Plan for Fused Prompt : 1. ** Emotional Depth **: Introduce elements to evoke stronger emotions , such as serene , nature -inspired effects like wind - blown petals . 2. ** Interpretive Depth **: Add symbolic features like small visible gears representing the passage of time . ### Refined Fused Prompt : ‘‘‘ json {" fused_prompt ": " A bicycle crafted from intertwining glass tendrils with an ethereal , soft glow . Delicately engraved with floral patterns , it radiates elegance and serenity . Gentle wind - blown petals encircle the bicycle , enhancing its connection to nature . Small visible gears set within the frame symbolize the passage of time , inviting the viewer to ponder evolution and change . Meticulously engineered , it showcases mechanical artistry and creativity . Set against a plain white background , this imaginative bicycle evokes a sense of timeless exploration and harmony ." }‘‘‘ --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_k5H6JMqESqnXY0XXnUds7orp ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’) ] --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’ , call_id = ’ call_k5H6JMqESqnXY0XXnUds7orp ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- PromptArchitect ---- ------Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_Y38eFjGND5axE1lDNNLg7nRO ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ generative_executor_generate_edit ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ GenerativeExecutor , please run generation or editing given the fused prompt from PromptArchitect ’ , name = ’ generative_executor_generate_edit ’ , call_id = ’ call_Y38eFjGND5axE1lDNNLg7nRO ’ , is_error = False ) ] 

39 Table 20: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing (cntd) 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing (cntd) 

--- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------GenerativeExecutor , please run generation or editing given the fused prompt from PromptArchitect --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_UAoZ6HoayNjE3TXbbSAf19Nt ’ , arguments = ’{" prompt ":" A bicycle crafted from intertwining glass tendrils with an ethereal , soft glow . Delicately engraved with floral patterns , it radiates elegance and serenity . Gentle wind - blown petals encircle the bicycle , enhancing its connection to nature . Small visible gears set within the frame symbolize the passage of time , inviting the viewer to ponder evolution and change . Meticulously engineered , it showcases mechanical artistry and creativity . Set against a plain white background , this imaginative bicycle evokes a sense of timeless exploration and harmony ."} ’ , name = ’ edit_image_flux_controlnet ’) ] --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content ="{ ’ message ’: ’ Image successfully edited using Flux + ControlNet . ’ , ’ path ’:./ b i c y c l e _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 4 9 0 4 _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 5 3 3 9 . png }" , name = ’ edit_image_flux_controlnet ’ , call_id = ’ call_UAoZ6HoayNjE3TXbbSAf19Nt ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------{ ’ message ’: ’ Image successfully edited using Flux + ControlNet . ’ , ’ path ’:./ code / staging_editing / b i c y c l e _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 4 9 0 4 _ 2 0 2 5 0 3 2 4 0 6 5 3 3 9 . png } --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------Finished image generation / editing , asking Critic for evaluation --- ----- -- GenerativeExecutor ----------Here is the newly edited image of concept : " A bicycle ." , along with the original unedited version . Please evaluate the edit . < image > < image > --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----{" originality ":{" score ":5 ," comment ":" The edited image presents a highly original concept by transforming a bicycle into an organic , bamboo - like structure with floral elements integrated into the wheels and handlebars . This introduces a novel perspective on traditional bike design , merging mechanical and natural elements in an unexpected way ."} ," expressiveness ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" The bike ’ s transformation into a nature - themed , floral - embellished object evokes a sense of harmony with nature and creativity . While it conveys a clear concept , its emotional impact , though present , may not be deeply profound ."} ," aesthetic ":{" score ":5 ," comment ":" The image is aesthetically appealing with aharmonious composition and well - balanced elements . The use of colors and the organic textures create visual interest and effectively enhance the storytelling of a bike becoming part of nature ."} ," technical ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" Technically , the image is well - crafted with a good level of detail in the bamboo - like texture and floral components . However , some areas could benefit from more refinement in texture to fully realize the craftsmanship excellence ."} ," unexpected ":{" score ":5 ," comment ":" The image excels in unexpected associations by ingeniously blending the structural aesthetics of a bike with natural , floral elements . This inventive fusion provides a fresh reinterpretation of both components ."} ," interpretability ":{" score ":4 ," comment ":" While the image invites exploration through its details and thematic elements , the depth of interpretability may be limited . It suggests harmony and innovation , though it does not present a multitude of layers that evolve with further viewing ."} ," addional_comments ":" The edited image creatively reimagines a traditional bicycle using natural and whimsical elements , effectively merging human -made and organic design . The ControlNet conditioning scale appears well - adjusted for this transformation ."} --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_qj3fBkxYbLKYUHBVv8yPGwYX ’ , arguments = ’{} ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’) ] --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’ Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback . Please determine if this score is above the threshold . ’ , name = ’ creative_director_handoff ’ , call_id = ’ call_qj3fBkxYbLKYUHBVv8yPGwYX ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- Critic ----- -----Task finished , returning control to Creative Director for feedback . Please determine if this score is above the threshold . 

40 Table 21: End-to-End Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for highly-creative disentangled image editing (cntd) 

Collaborative Multi-Agentic Debate for Disentangled Image Editing (cntd) 

--- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ FunctionCall ( id = ’ call_kzW4nPxyu1e5U5cfIS1AbtMF ’ , arguments = ’{" critic_response_json ":"{\\" originality \\":{\\" score \\":5 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The edited image presents a highly original concept by transforming a bicycle into an organic , bamboo - like structure with floral elements integrated into the wheels and handlebars . This introduces a novel perspective on traditional bike design , merging mechanical and natural elements in an unexpected way .\\"} ,\\" expressiveness \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The bike \ ’ s transformation into a nature - themed , floral - embellished object evokes a sense of harmony with nature and creativity . While it conveys a clear concept , its emotional impact , though present , may not be deeply profound .\\"} ,\\" aesthetic \\":{\\" score \\":5 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The image is aesthetically appealing with a harmonious composition and well - balanced elements . The use of colors and the organic textures create visual interest and effectively enhance the storytelling of a bike becoming part of nature .\\"} ,\\" technical \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" Technically , the image is well - crafted with a good level of detail in the bamboo - like texture and floral components . However , some areas could benefit from more refinement in texture to fully realize the craftsmanship excellence .\\"} ,\\" unexpected \\":{\\" score \\":5 ,\\" comment \\":\\" The image excels in unexpected associations by ingeniously blending the structural aesthetics of a bike with natural , floral elements . This inventive fusion provides a fresh reinterpretation of both components .\\"} ,\\" interpretability \\":{\\" score \\":4 ,\\" comment \\":\\" While the image invites exploration through its details and thematic elements , the depth of interpretability may be limited . It suggests harmony and innovation , though it does not present a multitude of layers that evolve with further viewing .\\"} ,\\" addional_comments \\":\\" The edited image creatively reimagines a traditional bicycle using natural and whimsical elements , effectively merging human - made and organic design . The ControlNet conditioning scale appears well - adjusted for this transformation .\\"}"} ’ , name = ’ is_score_above_threshold ’) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------[ F u nc t i o nE x e c u ti o n R e su l t ( content = ’{" Message ":" Current image received 27/30" ," i s _ s c o r e _ a b o v e _ t h r e s h o l d ": True } ’ , name = ’ is_score_above_threshold ’ , call_id = ’ call_kzW4nPxyu1e5U5cfIS1AbtMF ’ , is_error = False ) ] --- ----- -- CreativeDirector -- --------The creative bicycle design has successfully met the creative standards . The fusion of mechanical and natural elements achieved a refreshing and imaginative outcome . If you have any additional requests or need further adjustments , feel free to let me know ! 

41