Title: 1818_Multi_Agent_Collaboration.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=L0xZPXT3le

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Multi-Agent Collaboration via Evolving Orchestration 

Yufan Dang ⋆† Chen Qian ♣† Xueheng Luo ⋆ Jingru Fan ⋆ Zihao Xie ⋆

Ruijie Shi ⋆ Weize Chen ⋆ Cheng Yang ♠ Xiaoyin Che ♢ Ye Tian ♡

Xuantang Xiong ♡ Lei Han ♡ Zhiyuan Liu ⋆B Maosong Sun ⋆B

> ⋆

Tsinghua University ♣Shanghai Jiao Tong University 

> ♠

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 

> ♢

Siemens ♡Tencent Robotics X 

dangyf25@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn qianc@sjtu.edu.cn liuzy@tsinghua.edu.cn sms@tsinghua.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable results across diverse downstream tasks, but their monolithic nature restricts scalability and efficiency in complex problem-solving. While recent research explores multi-agent collab-oration among LLMs, most approaches rely on static organizational structures that struggle to adapt as task complexity and agent numbers grow, resulting in coordination overhead and inefficiencies. To this end, we propose a puppeteer-style paradigm for LLM-based multi-agent collaboration, where a centralized orchestra-tor ("puppeteer") dynamically directs agents ("puppets") in response to evolving task states. This orchestrator is trained via reinforcement learning to adaptively sequence and prioritize agents, enabling flexible and evolvable collective reasoning. Experiments on closed- and open-domain scenarios show that this method achieves superior performance with reduced computational costs. Analyses further reveal that the key improvements consistently stem from the emergence of more compact, cyclic reasoning structures under the orchestrator’s evolution. Our code is available at https://github.com/OpenBMB/ChatDev/tree/puppeteer .Puppeteer 

> i.e., Policy
> Manupilate
> i.e., Orchestrate
> Puppet
> i.e., Agent
> Environment
> i.e., Reinforcing

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed multi-agent collaboration framework. A central policy ("pup-peteer") dynamically orchestrates which agent ("puppet") should reason at each step based on the evolving state of the task. As the task progresses, the orchestrator adaptively promotes more effective agents while removing those that are less useful, analogous to a puppeteer learning to skillfully pull or cut strings to direct a performance. 

> †

Equal Contribution. 

> B

Corresponding Author. 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). 1 Introduction 

Large language models (LLMs) [ 69 , 48 , 28 ] have achieved remarkable advances across diverse natural language processing tasks, demonstrating strong capabilities in planning [ 62 , 57 , 46 ], reasoning [ 70 ,53 , 33 ], and decision-making [ 31 , 64 , 1 ]. As the ambition to tackle ever more complex, multi-faceted problems—such as tool-augmented inference [ 47 , 51 , 86 , 55 ] and collaborative problem-solving [ 42 , 29 , 12 ] in open environments—continues to grow, the limitations of monolithic LLMs are becoming increasingly apparent [71, 8, 9]. To address these challenges, recent research has drawn inspiration from human teamwork, exploring multi-agent systems (MAS) comprising diverse LLM-based agents with specialized skills [ 45 , 52 ], personalized reasoning patterns [ 70 , 76 , 43 ], and external tool integrations [ 85 , 47 ]. However, many existing approaches rely on predefined or statically generated agent topologies [ 61 , 44 ] that lack flexibility and scalability. This rigidity often leads to increased coordination overhead, degraded system performance, and inefficiencies as the variety of tasks [ 81 , 23 ] and the number of agents scale [ 45 ]. Especially in large-scale scenarios, the absence of principled and dynamic coordination can further result in redundant computation [ 77 ], ineffective communication [ 13 ], and diminished collective problem-solving effectiveness [6]. 1

Can dynamic 2 orchestration simultaneously maximize collaborative effectiveness and computational efficiency? Answering this question is crucial for building scalable, robust, and practical collective intelligence suitable for complex real-world settings. To this end, we propose a novel paradigm for constructing flexible and continually evolving multi-agent system. Drawing inspiration from puppet shows—where a central puppeteer skillfully directs multiple puppets behind the scenes—we reconceptualize multi-agent collaboration as a reasoning process orchestrated by a centralized puppeteer who dynamically selects and sequences agent activations based on evolving task states, implicitly coordinating collaboration within the group. As tasks progress, the orchestrator learns to prioritize effective agents and suppress less efficient ones, continually driving the system toward higher overall performance and efficiency. Specifically, our framework advances multi-agent reasoning by introducing two key innovations: (i) Dynamic Orchestration : Moving beyond static collaboration patterns, we employ a dynamic orchestrator that routing agents at each step based on the current contexts. This process is formulated as a sequential decision problem, effectively yielding an implicit inference graph and supporting flexible, scalable agent coordination. (ii) Adaptive Evolution : To maximize efficiency and minimize redundancy, we employ reinforcement learning to continuously update the orchestrator’s policy by leveraging feedback from completed tasks. Over time, the orchestrator learns to emphasize strong agent trajectories and prune less effective ones, enabling the system to evolve toward greater efficiency progressively. Empirical results on both closed- and open-domain scenarios demonstrate that our approach consis-tently yields more effective solutions while requiring less computational overhead. Analyses further reveal that, although the evolved topologies are not fixed across different tasks, the key improvements consistently stem from the emergence of more compact, cyclic reasoning structures. 

2 Method 

We propose a unified framework for multi-agent reasoning that organizes diverse LLM-based agents via orchestrating their collaboration dynamically using a centralized policy, and continually optimizes their collaboration process through reinforcement learning. A LLM-based agent can be abstracted in its minimal form as a = ( m, r, t ), where m denotes the foundation model, r represents the reasoning pattern or prompting strategy, and t is the set of available external tools. The agent space A enumerates all possible agents formed by combinations of these components, i.e., A = {(m, r, t )}, encompassing both intrinsic and tool-augmented reasoning. Each agent thus represents an atomic reasoning behavior participating in task solving. 

> 1For example, mesh-structured multi-agent systems with 50 nodes can require up to 10 hours to develop software comprising only a few hundred lines of code.
> 2This paper refers to the dynamic organizational structure during real-time reasoning.

2For multi-agent collaboration, following [ 45 ], a MAS is naturally formalized as a directed graph 

G = ( V, E), where each node v ∈ V corresponds to an agent a ∈ A , and each directed edge 

(vi, v j ) ∈ E encodes a dependency or information flow, conveying intermediate context from agent 

ai to agent aj . Typically, this graph presents a single-source, single-sink configuration: the source node represents the input task, while the sink node yields the unified task output (i.e., artifact). This formalism underlies a unified and temporal modeling framework for LLM-based reasoning systems and is analogous to a "graph-of-thought" [2] that captures the deep thinking process. 

2.1 Dynamic Orchestration Centralized Puppeteer A challenge in multi-agent reasoning is achieving efficient orchestration as task complexity and agent diversity increase. In previous approaches, each agent autonomously selects collaborators, but this incurs coordination overhead and poor scalability, particularly as agents increase or change [ 87 , 45 ]. Instead, inspired by centralized coordination ( e.g., a puppeteer managing multiple puppets), we model the system as driven by a centralized orchestrator. This orchestrator dynamically selects which agents to activate in each step, based on the dynamic task state, and delegates reasoning to the selected agents. Such centralization decouples agent selection from internal agent behaviors, greatly enhancing adaptability and scalability without extensive parameter retraining. 

Serialized Orchestration Another challenge stems from the combinatorially large space of possible collaboration topologies among agents. Exhaustive search is infeasible, thus prior work focuses only on canonical graphs ( e.g., chains, trees, graphs) [ 76 , 70 , 2]. Instead, we propose to serialize the collaborative reasoning process: rather than searching the entire topological space, the orchestrator "unfolds" the graph into a reasoning sequence guided by a topological traversal strategy. By main-taining a topological ordering, the reasoning steps follow the partial order implied by the problem dependencies. It is important to note that although the orchestration of agents appears to be serialized and "unfolded", when this episode is restored through folding, it can be reconstructed as a directed graph (with agents as nodes and orchestration partial order relations as edges). Building on the two concepts above, we formalize the multi-agent collaboration as a sequential decision process governed by a centralized policy π. At each time step t, the orchestrator selects a single agent at ∈ A to activate, conditioned on the current global system state St and the task specification τ . The global state St consists of all relevant agent states and aggregated contextual information up to step t:

at ∼ π(St, τ ) = P(a | St, τ ) (1) where the policy π is a function mapping the observable context—such as the current state and task description—to a distribution over candidate agents [ 73 , 74 ] ( e.g., via neural scoring, embedding-based models, or Bradley-Terry style approaches [68]). Upon activation, agent at receives its state st(at) (extracted from St) and generates its output by a generative reasoning mapping fat , after which the system state is updated ( Φ) as: 

ot = fat (st(at), S t), St+1 = Φ( St, o t) (2) The process continues iteratively: at each step, the orchestrator observes the updated system state 

St+1 and selects the next agent at+1 to activate, again using the policy π conditioned only on St+1 

and τ . This sequential agent selection process explicitly satisfies the Markov property [17]: 

P(at+1 | S0, . . . , S t+1 , τ ) = P(at+1 | St+1 , τ ) (3) The process terminates when a stopping criterion is met ( e.g., when the selected agent is a designated terminator or when the task-solving resource is exhausted). At that point, a final aggregation function 

Fagg combines all agent outputs across timesteps to yield the overall solution: 

o∗ = Fagg ({o0, o 1, . . . , o T }) = Φ( ST , o T ) (4) where T denotes the total number of reasoning steps. 

2.2 Adaptive Evolution 

While dynamic orchestration enables flexible agents’ long-chain reasoning, naive implementations may invoke redundant or unhelpful agents, resulting in unacceptable inefficiency. To address this, 3thanks to the Markov property, a learnable policy is considered for continuously learning to make agent selection decisions adaptively. After each reasoning episode, the system receives feedback jointly evaluating solution quality and resource consumption, enabling the policy to learn which agent is most valuable based on real-time task states. Practically, this facilitates dynamic pruning of agents: the orchestration process adapts to increasingly favor compact reasoning chains by reducing reliance on agents that offer little incremental gain or incur excessive cost. Over time, the orchestrator policy evolves to organize more effective agent sequences, balancing expressive collaboration with computational efficiency. Thus, the evolvable puppeteer not only orchestrates agent collaboration, but also distills the reasoning process to its most essential components, enabling robust and scalable performance. 

Policy Optimization To systematically optimize both the effectiveness and efficiency of collabo-ration, we employ REINFORCE [ 60 ], a reinforcement learning (RL) technique, as our underlying optimization framework [ 40 , 31 , 73 , 54 ]. By doing so, the orchestration policy learns from previous executions, adaptively refining agent selection and pruning strategies to achieve more robust and cost-efficient multi-agent reasoning. Concretely, the optimization objective is to maximize the expected return over complete reasoning trajectories, where the return reflects both overall effectiveness and inference efficiency: 

J(θ) = Eπθ

R(τ ), ∇θ J(θ) ≈ 1

N

> N

X

> n=1
> T

X

> t=1

∇θ log πθ (at|St)

!

· R(τ ) (5) with R(τ ) denoting the total reward accrued for trajectory τ = {S0, a 0, o 0, S 1, . . . , S T , a T , o T }, and 

ot the output generated by agent at at state St, N is the sample size, and T is the total number of steps in one trajectory. The orchestrator’s parameters θ are updated iteratively via gradient ascent: 

θ ← θ + α∇θ J(θ), with learning rate α. Through such RL-driven optimization, the orchestrator leverages accumulated cross-task experience to refine agent selection, dynamically suppressing unhelpful or costly agents and converging toward more compact, high-performing collaboration structures. 

Reward Design To effectively guide the orchestrator’s optimization, we design a reward function that jointly accounts for both solution quality and computational efficiency. Upon completion of each task trajectory, a terminal reward r is assigned: for tasks with ground-truth answers, r ∈ { 0, 1}

indicates correctness; for open-ended tasks, r ∈ [0 , 1] quantifies answer quality. The overall reward is defined recursively over time steps [ 59 ]. At the terminal state ( t = T ), the cumulative reward incorporates both solution quality and total computational cost: 

Rt =

r − λ · CT , if t = Tγ · Rt+1 − λ · Ct, if t < T , Ct = F · log 



1 + tφ



(6) where λ controls the trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, γ ∈ (0 , 1] is the discount factor. To encourage economical reasoning, we penalize excessive computational expenditure. Specifically, for each reasoning step t, we define a step-wise cost Ct based on FLOPs or token-level metrics [ 50 ], denoted by F , and a step factor normalized by the maximum step budget φ, i.e., t/φ . This composite reward formulation incentivizes the orchestrator to achieve correct and high-quality solutions while minimizing unnecessary computation, ultimately driving the MAS to discover reasoning structures that are both effective and cost-efficient. 

3 Experiments 

Datasets and Metrics To thoroughly assess our framework, we use a range of publicly available and logically demanding datasets covering both closed- and open-domain reasoning tasks: 

• Closed-domain Tasks : These tasks require precise, objective reasoning and unambiguous answers, making them well-suited for evaluating core inference accuracy and mathematical rigor. GSM-Hard [18 ] features arithmetic problems involving unusually large numbers and complex multi-step calculations, challenging models’ advanced mathematical reasoning and error-free execution. 

MMLU-Pro [67 ] is a comprehensive benchmark spanning diverse subjects and difficulty levels, 4using multiple-choice questions to assess both factual knowledge and logical deduction. Both benchmarks are designed to assess the model’s ability in mathematical and commonsense reasoning and inference, with accuracy as the evaluation metric. 

• Open-domain Tasks : These tasks are inherently creative and open-ended, requiring multi-dimensional qualitative evaluation. They rigorously assess agents’ ability to integrate information, understand context, and generate novel solutions. SRDD [ 44 ] consists of real-world textual software requirements and tasks agents with building the corresponding software, demanding proficiency in requirement comprehension, system/design reasoning, code generation, and testing. Its official evaluation metric combines completeness, executability, and consistency [ 44 ], reflecting the practi-cal demands of real-world software development workflows. CommonGen-Hard [ 39 ] challenges agents to generate coherent sentences that connect seemingly unrelated concepts, highlighting their abilities in commonsense reasoning, contextual understanding, and creative expression. Evaluation is based on an aggregate metric that incorporates grammar, relevance, logical consistency[ 32 ], as well as concept coverage [39], providing a nuanced assessment of generative quality. 

Baselines To mitigate performance interference—where strong models may overshadow the con-tributions of weaker ones—and to evaluate our method’s adaptability across agents with varying capacities, we partition the agent pool based on the parameter scale of the underlying models. Specif-ically, we define a Mimas subspace (smaller models: Qwen-2.5-7B , Qwen-2.5-14B , LLaMA-3.1-8B ,

LLaMA-3.2-3B , Mistral-7B , Mistral-Nemo-12B ) and a Titan subspace (larger models: GPT-4-Turbo ,

GPT-4o-Mini , Gemini-1.5-Pro , Gemini-1.5-Flash , Claude-3-Sonnet , Claude-3-Haiku , Qwen-2.5-72B ,

LLaMA-3.1-405B ), covering both closed- and open-source families. All experiments are performed under both the Titan and Mimas subspace settings. To ensure the rigor and credibility of our experi-mental study, we select a suite of representative and recent baselines that comprehensively span the spectrum from straightforward LLM generation to advanced agentic paradigms: 

• Pure Models : This category evaluates foundation models in the absence of explicit agent struc-turing or workflow orchestration , serving as a baseline for generative inference performance. For Mimas, competitive open-source models include LLaMA-3.1-8B , Mistral-Nemo-12B , and 

Qwen-2.5-14B .3 For Titan, options such as LLaMA-3.1-405B , GPT-4o-mini , and GPT-4-turbo are considered. 

• Single-Agent Methods : This category explores paradigms where reasoning is performed by a single agent using a specific reasoning pattern or workflow. Self-refine [ 39 ] exemplifies iterative, self-corrective reasoning within a feedback loop, whereas AFlow [81 ] enhances agent reasoning efficiency by utilizing Monte Carlo Tree Search to optimize code-represented agent workflows. 

• Multi-Agent Methods : We benchmark against the latest multi-agent reasoning systems, show-casing state-of-the-art capabilities in leveraging agent heterogeneity and dynamic collaboration. 

MacNet [45 ] orchestrates agents within topologically static directed acyclic graphs, facilitating collective intelligence driven by one foundation model to enhance reasoning performance. EvoA-gent [ 78 ] adopts evolutionary algorithms to automatically generate and optimize diverse multi-agent systems, adaptively improving collaboration and performance without manual intervention. 

Implementation Details Different agents are equipped with distinct reasoning patterns—such as task decomposition , reflection , refinement , critique , modification , summarization , and termina-tion —enabling flexible problem-solving [ 43 , 21 , 82 , 39 ]. External tools like WebViewer , WikiSearch ,

BingSearch , arXivSearch , Code Interpreter , and File Reader are also integrated [ 47 ]. Dynamic collaboration uses majority voting for output aggregation. The policy is initialized with a variant of Llama-3.1 4, using default settings: episode length to 4, parallel exploration up to 3, λ = 0 .1, and 

γ = 0 .99 . All baselines are rerun under identical settings. 

3.1 Does Our Method Lead To Elevated Performance? 

Many prior studies on multi-agent systems have employed the same base model to drive agent behavior [ 44 , 36 , 87 ]. To enable a more meaningful comparison and account for model heterogeneity, our method, referred to as Puppeteer, introduces two distinct configurations within each agent 

> 3Other smaller-scale models in the same series ( e.g., Qwen-2.0-7B ) have also been experimentally validated, and their performance is generally weaker than that of the larger-scale model within the same series.
> 4https://huggingface.co/nvidia/Llama-3.1-Nemotron-70B-Reward-HF

5subspace: the Mono setting, wherein all agents are driven by the same model, and we use LLaMA-3.1-405B for Titan subspace and LLaMA-3.1-8B for Mimas subspace, and the default setting, wherein agents are driven by a diverse set of models. As Puppeteer undergoes online reinforcement learning, we categorize its learning process into two distinct phases: an initial phase characterized by unrefined behavior, and an evolved phase marked by reinforced performance. Table 1: Performance comparison of different methods across various datasets in Titan and Mimas subspaces respectively. For each dataset, the highest scores are highlighted in bold and the second-highest are underlined.                                                                                                                                           

> Mimas GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD CommonGen-Hard AVG.
> Llama-3.1-8B 0.0000 †0.5250 0.4615 †0.6992 †0.4214 †
> Mistral-Nemo-12B 0.0350 †0.4500 †0.2097 †0.7146 †0.3523 †
> Qwen-2.5-14B 0.0450 †0.3800 †0.5891 †0.5747 †0.3972 †
> Self-Refine Llama-3.1-8B 0.4750 0.2600 †0.5412 †0.6018 †0.4695 †
> AFlow Llama-3.1-8B 0.2900 †0.5000 0.6362 †0.7194 0.5364 †
> MacNet Llama-3.1-8B 0.0000 †0.2000 †0.2017 †0.7434 0.2862 †
> EvoAgent Llama-3.1-8B 0.1250 †0.5000 0.2510 †0.7167 0.3981 †
> Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Puppeteer-Mono Llama-3.1-8B 0.2467 0.4800 0.4500 0.5200 0.6983 0.7249 0.6323 0.7341 0.5068 0.6147 Puppeteer 0.5600 0.5400 0.5700 0.6300 0.6653 0.6266 0.7139 0.7333 0.6273 0.6324 Titan GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD CommonGen-Hard AVG.
> Llama-3.1-405B 0.1350 †0.7600 0.6061 †0.8116 †0.5781 †
> GPT-4o-Mini 0.1050 †0.5950 †0.6822 †0.6691 †0.5128 †
> GPT-4-Turbo 0.2750 †0.6800 †0.6244 †0.7632 †0.5856 †
> Self-Refine Llama-3.1-405B 0.5250 0.6000 †0.6345 †0.7033 †0.6157 †
> AFlow Llama-3.1-405B 0.5400 †0.7500 0.6478 †0.8218 0.6899 †
> MacNet Llama-3.1-405B 0.2905 †0.4800 †0.4228 †0.8817 †0.5187 †
> EvoAgent Llama-3.1-405B 0.4250 †0.5400 †0.1730 †0.8599 0.4994 †
> Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Initialized Evolved Puppeteer-Mono Llama-3.1-405B 0.5400 0.6100 0.6910 0.7600 0.6264 0.7697 0.8111 0.8417 0.6671 0.7453 Puppeteer 0.6600 0.7000 0.7400 0.8300 0.6191 0.7637 0.7381 0.7987 0.6893 0.7731

As detailed in Table 1, Puppeteer consistently achieves superior average performance during the evolved phase across all evaluated tasks, irrespective of domain type or model space size. Similarly, Puppeteer-Mono demonstrates robust performance across both large- and small-scale models. These results collectively underscore the exceptional capability of our centralized orchestrator in coordinat-ing both heterogeneous and single-model-driven agents to form highly effective MAS, highlighting its robustness in managing diverse agent configurations. Compared to various agent workflows and multi-agent baselines using the same base model, Puppeteer-Mono consistently outperforms competing methods across nearly all evaluated tasks. This result highlights the efficacy of our centralized orchestrator in coordinating single-model-driven agents with optimized reasoning strategies and strategic tool utilization, surpassing alternative frame-works. It underscores that superior performance stems from sophisticated organizational design and a context-aware, dynamically constructed multi-agent topology. Notably, despite Puppeteer-Mono leveraging near-optimal models within its respective subspaces, Puppeteer consistently achieves superior performance, likely benefiting from complementary interactions among heterogeneous agents driven by diverse models. Additionally, the expanded space in Puppeteer enables broader exploration of the solution landscape, thereby enhancing optimization opportunities. To illustrate Puppeteer’s capability in organizing effective MAS, we compare performance between the initial and evolved phases. The results show that continued optimization yields substantial gains—for example, Puppeteer in the Titan subspace improves from 0.6893 to 0.7731 on average, with a similar trend observed in the Mimas subspace. These findings highlight the critical role of continual optimization in enhancing coordination and task specialization, and further suggest promising directions for advancing beyond traditional, static agent paradigms toward more adaptive and collaborative agent systems. 

3.2 Does Performance Gain Come at the Expense of Efficiency? 

Recent research in non-learnable multi-agent systems has highlighted a trade-off: performance gains achieved through agent collaboration are often accompanied by increased overall token consump-6tion [ 77 , 45 ]. To investigate whether our approach exhibits a similar pattern, we visualize the average token consumption and the number of orchestrated agents throughout the training process. Token Count Evolution 

> λ=0.03
> λ=0.10
> λ=0.03
> λ=0.10
> Agent Count Evolution
> Learning Process Learning Process #Tokens #Agents

Figure 3: Token consumption and agent count orchestrated in the Titan subspace for Puppeteer-Mono on MMLU-Pro. As shown in Figure 2, the token metric consistently de-creases over the course of learning across almost all set-tings. This demonstrates that our system’s performance improvements do not come at the cost of increased compu-tational overhead; on the contrary, our approach achieves simultaneous advances in both effectiveness and efficiency. This result is primarily attributed to our reward design, which balances accuracy and efficiency via a tunable weighting factor λ, enabling adaptable trade-offs tailored to different application needs, with higher values of λ indi-cating a greater emphasis on minimizing cost, as shown in the Figure 3. Specifically, the reward is designed to encour-age the orchestrator to: (i) prioritize agents that complete tasks with reduced token usage while preserving perfor-mance, and (ii) terminate reasoning early by invoking the Terminator agent, thereby fostering efficiency through the exclusion of redundant or low-contributing agents. This mechanism enables the orchestrator to optimize both overall performance and resource consumption. In extreme cases, if the efficiency factor is entirely omitted from the reward design, the system naturally degenerates into a traditional large-scale collaborative framework, albeit with potentially further improvements in performance. More specifically, in the Titan setting, the number of active agents notably decreases over the course of learning, suggesting that the orchestrator progressively learns to terminate the reasoning process earlier for more efficient problem-solving. In contrast, in the Mimas setting (see Appendix for results), the number of orchestrated agents remains relatively stable, indicating the orchestrator’s caution in prematurely halting the reasoning process due to the comparatively limited capabilities of the agents. In this case, reductions in token consumption are primarily achieved through the preferential selection of lower-cost agents rather than shorter reasoning chains. This contrast between Titan and Mimas arises from fundamental differences in agent capacity: Titan agents can solve tasks more efficiently, enabling earlier stopping without quality loss, whereas Mimas agents often require longer, more elaborate reasoning processes to ensure reliable completion. 

3.3 How Does Organizational Topology Evolve During Reinforcement? 

To elucidate the emergent organization of multi-agent collaboration, we systematically examine the evolution of agent interaction topologies throughout the learning process. Multi-agent reasoning can be abstractly modeled as dynamic orchestration governed by our centralized orchestrator, yet empirical evidence reveals an untrained "initialized" MAS system often results in a highly sophisticated and adaptive organizational structure. Instead of relying on a static structure, our Puppeteer dynamically constructs intricate topological motifs—such as trees, graphs, and cycles—by selecting the next agent to activate at each reasoning step based on the current reasoning state. Thus, the topology emerges incrementally during reasoning, embodying a flexible, context-aware organizational paradigm. CommonGen-Hard GSM-Hard  

> #Tokens #Agents Learning Process Learning Process
> MMLU-Pro SRDD
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline #Tokens #Agents Learning Process Learning Process #Tokens #Agents Learning Process Learning Process #Tokens #Agents Learning Process Learning Process

Figure 2: Evolution of token consumption and the number of orchestrated agents per task along the training process. Trends are fitted using LOWESS (Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing) [14]. 7Chain Topology          

> Tree Topology
> Graph Topology
> Self -loop Cross -branch Backtracking
> From Tree to Graph
> From Chain to Tree
> Branching Expansion Parallel Trajectory

Figure 4: The organizational topology evolves as a gen-eral directed graph, shaped by the unconstrained orches-tration. Agent  

> Edge between Agents

Figure 5: Examples of topology evolution. Although the simplest form of multi-agent collaboration is often represented as a chain structure [ 44 ,70 ], the Puppeteer’s dynamic orchestration naturally fosters tree-structured interactions by enabling the selection of one or multiple agents at each step. This mechanism supports branching behavior and parallel pathways, thereby enhancing scalability as the number of agents grows. However, despite an initial resemblance to tree-like expansion [ 76 ] driven by branching, the resulting topologies are inherently graph-structured [ 45 , 87 , 2]. This property arises from the flexible orchestration, which permits repeated agent activations, leading to cycles and feedback loops. Moreover, cross-branch connections emerge organically, underscoring the system’s capacity to generate rich, expressive, and adaptive interaction patterns. Representative examples of these emergent motifs, including cycles, backtracking, and cross-branch links, are illustrated in Figure 4. As the puppeteer evolves over time, its orchestrating behavior changes accordingly, leading to distinct behaviors in the resulting MAS. Here, we present a specific sample, selected from both the initial and evolved phases, to demonstrate the emerging optimization effects. As shown in Figure 5, the initial phase features multiple disjoint chains, reflecting exploratory organization; after evolution, paths become fewer and cycles appear, indicating more stable and coordinated interactions. Additionally, the initial phase features two-agent communication with higher overhead; as evolution progresses, the structure condenses to a single agent handling continuous reasoning, reflecting more efficient coordination and decision-making. Density  

> Initial Evolved Initial avg. = 1.0829 Evolved avg. = 1.4479

(a) Graph Density Distribution cycle length=1 cycle length=2 cycle length=3 Count  

> Initial Evolved Initial avg. = 0.52 Evolved avg. = 0.62 Initial avg. = 1.17 Evolved avg. = 1.40 Initial avg. = 0.17 Evolved avg. = 0.38 Initial avg. = 0.00 Evolved avg. = 0.06 cycle length=4

(b) Cycle distribution 

Figure 6: The compaction and cyclicality dynamics in the evolution of multi-agent organizational structures. 8Empirical observation reveals that Puppeteer’s dynamic orchestration—which fosters graph-structured topologies with diverse inter-agent connections—gives rise to two key structural phenomena: com-paction and cyclicality . The evolving interplay between densely clustered agents and frequent communication cycles marks a significant transformation in multi-agent systems, shifting from loosely organized, exploratory interactions to tightly coordinated, specialized collectives. 

• Compaction . We observe a marked trend toward structural compaction over the course of learning (Figure 6a). As optimization proceeds, graph density—quantifying the degree of inter-agent connectivity—steadily increases, with organizational structure evolving toward highly interactive and tightly coupled subnetworks. Communication becomes progressively concentrated among a subset of recurrently active ’hub’ agents, forming dense subgraphs characterized by frequent and focused information exchange. This phenomenon is particularly pronounced in the Titan (large-model) subspace, where the orchestrator preferentially routes decisions through a small cohort of strong agents, thereby intensifying iterative reasoning and collaborative consensus formation. Ultimately, the system transitions from diffuse, exploratory interaction patterns to highly synergistic and focused multi-agent reasoning. 

• Cyclicality . In conjunction with compaction, we document a significant rise in cycle formation as learning progresses (Figure 6b). Cyclic topologies—in which agents repeatedly revisit previous collaborators via closed-loop routes—facilitate the re-circulation of intermediate results, mutual verification, and continual refinement. Unlike strictly hierarchical or acyclic networks, this cyclical structure supports recursive critique and sustained internal debate, much like what is seen in reflexive multi-agent paradigms ( e.g., Reflexion [ 54 ]). As cycles become more prevalent, the system exhibits deeper internal feedback, more efficient reuse of information, and increased resilience—hallmarks of mature, self-referential collaborative reasoning. 

3.4 How to Further Use Hyperparameters to Control Performance and Efficiency? Accuracy Accuracy  

> Accuracy Accuracy

Figure 7: Impact of topology constraints on token consump-tion and accuracy (W xDy denotes exploration with width x

and depth y; W 4D2 is the default). While reward shaping provides a di-rect mechanism for efficiency con-trol, the collaboration structure it-self is also crucial. As the or-chestrator organizes agent collabo-ration, upper-bound constraints on topology—specifically, chain depth and exploration width—are essential to prevent unbounded scaling and inef-ficiency. Depth refers to the length of orchestrated agent chains, while width captures the number of parallel explo-rations. As shown in Figure 7, there is a clear non-monotonic relationship: the default setting achieves the best trade-off for our purposes, whereas increasing depth or width leads to re-dundancy, higher computational costs, and possible performance degradation. In general, enhancing accuracy tends to increase token consumption, and vice versa, suggesting that carefully balancing depth and width can help maintain both efficiency and effectiveness. 

4 Related Work 

The rapid advancement of LLMs [ 69 , 3 , 48 , 28 , 31 , 4] has spurred the development of autonomous LLM-based agents [ 71 , 49 , 42 , 29 , 72 , 58 ], which exhibit strong capabilities in planning [ 66 , 21 , 24 ], memory [ 42 , 25 , 41 ], and tool usage [ 51 , 47 , 5, 75 ]. These agents demonstrate growing proficiency in addressing complex tasks [ 19 , 80 , 44 , 20 , 62 ], adapting to dynamic real-world environments [ 83 ,38 , 84 ], and exhibiting human-like behaviors such as collaboration and decision-making [ 10 , 42 , 52 ]. Given that a single LLM-based agent may struggle to handle the diverse and complex range of real-world tasks [ 16 , 29 , 64 ], recent research has increasingly focused on constructing LLM-based multi-agent systems [ 11 , 44 , 22 , 61 , 12 ] for software development[ 44 , 22 ], social simulation[ 42 , 25 ], medical treatment[61, 30], scientific discovery [79]. 9Early MAS designs relied on fixed, handcrafted structures, e.g., mirroring software engineering paradigms like waterfall models [ 42 , 11 , 44 ]. These static approaches led to rigid coordination [ 87 ,45 ], limited workflow flexibility [ 23 , 81 ], and suboptimal agent composition [ 15 , 42 , 37 , 35 ]. To address these issues, more adaptive orchestration methods have emerged: network-style organizations dynamically select agents (Dylan [ 36 ]) as optimizable graphs enable prompt refinement and better cooperation (GPT-Swarm [ 87 ], MacNet [ 45 ]); and code-based representations allow modeling of dynamic, task-specific processes. Recent approaches employ code-space search (ADAS [ 23 ], AFlow [ 81 ]) or train LLMs to generate MAS configurations on demand (MAS-GPT [ 77 ]). Beyond LLM-based MAS, classical MARL (Multi Agent Reinforcement Learning) works [ 26 , 65 , 34 , 63 ]have long explored coordination and role specialization, offering key inspirations for our RL-driven orchestration in LLM-based multi-agent systems. 

5 Conclusion 

We proposed a novel framework for adaptive multi-agent LLM collaboration inspired by puppet show orchestration, where a centralized, learnable "puppeteer" orchestrator dynamically activated agents within a directed graph-of-thoughts. Unlike previous methods with static or manually designed topologies, our approach incorporated context-sensitive orchestration and reinforcement learning-driven policy adaptation, enabling more principled and efficient collaboration. Experiments on diverse tasks showed that our method achieved superior solution quality and reduced computational cost. Analyses further revealed that the orchestrator promoted compact, cyclic reasoning structures, underpinning the performance improvements. We hope this work can constitute a valuable step toward dynamic and scalable coordination in multi-agent collaboration. 

Acknowledgement 

The work was supported by the Tencent Rhino-Bird Focused Research Program. 

References 

[1] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy Zeng. Do as i can and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. [2] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michał Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi, Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler. Graph of thoughts: solving elaborate problems with large language models. In 

Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , 2024. [3] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. [4] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT-4. In arXiv:2303.12712 , 2023. 10 [5] Tianle Cai, Xuezhi Wang, Tengyu Ma, Xinyun Chen, and Denny Zhou. Large Language Models as Tool Makers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2023. [6] Mert Cemri, Melissa Z. Pan, Shuyi Yang, Lakshya A. Agrawal, Bhavya Chopra, Rishabh Tiwari, Kurt Keutzer, Aditya Parameswaran, Dan Klein, Kannan Ramchandran, Matei Zaharia, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Why Do Multi-Agent LLM Systems Fail? In arXiv:2503.13657 ,2025. [7] Guoxin Chen, Minpeng Liao, Chengxi Li, and Kai Fan. AlphaMath Almost Zero: Process Supervision without Process. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [8] Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Ion Stoica, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. Are More LLM Calls All You Need? Towards the Scaling Properties of Compound AI Systems. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [9] Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter Bailis, Matei Zaharia, James Zou, and Ion Stoica. Optimizing Model Selection for Compound AI Systems. In arXiv:2502.14815 ,2025. [10] Liting Chen, Lu Wang, Hang Dong, Yali Du, Jie Yan, Fangkai Yang, Shuang Li, Pu Zhao, Si Qin, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. Introspective Tips: Large Language Model for In-Context Decision Making. In arXiv:2305.11598 , 2023. [11] Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chi-Min Chan, Heyang Yu, Yaxi Lu, Yi-Hsin Hung, Chen Qian, Yujia Qin, Xin Cong, Ruobing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, Maosong Sun, and Jie Zhou. AgentVerse: Facilitating Multi-Agent Collaboration and Exploring Emergent Behaviors. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [12] Weize Chen, Ziming You, Ran Li, yitong guan, Chen Qian, Chenyang Zhao, Cheng Yang, Ruob-ing Xie, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Internet of Agents: Weaving a Web of Heterogeneous Agents for Collaborative Intelligence. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [13] Weize Chen, Jiarui Yuan, Chen Qian, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Optima: Optimizing effectiveness and efficiency for llm-based multi-agent system. In arXiv:2410.08115 ,2025. [14] William S. Cleveland. LOWESS: A Program for Smoothing Scatterplots by Robust Locally Weighted Regression. In The American Statistician , 1981. [15] Ameet Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Ashwin Kalyan, and Karthik Narasimhan. Toxicity in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned language models. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EMNLP) , 2023. [16] Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models through Multiagent Debate. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. [17] S. N. Ethier and T. G. Kurtz. Markov Processes: Characterization and Convergence. In Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics , 1986. [18] Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. PAL: program-aided language models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2023. [19] Yingqiang Ge, Wenyue Hua, Kai Mei, Jianchao Ji, Juntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Zelong Li, and Yongfeng Zhang. OpenAGI: When LLM Meets Domain Experts. In arXiv:2304.04370 , 2023. 11 [20] Paul Hager, Friederike Jungmann, Robbie Holland, Kunal Bhagat, Inga Hubrecht, Manuel Knauer, Jakob Vielhauer, Marcus Makowski, Rickmer Braren, Georgios Kaissis, and Daniel Rueckert. Evaluation and Mitigation of the Limitations of Large Language Models in Clinical Decision-making. In Nature Medicine , 2024. [21] Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning with Language Model is Planning with World Model. In The 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2023. [22] Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Chenyu Ran, Lingfeng Xiao, Chenglin Wu, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [23] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated Design of Agentic Systems. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [24] Zhiyuan Hu, Chumin Liu, Xidong Feng, Yilun Zhao, See-Kiong Ng, Anh Tuan Luu, Junxian He, Pang Wei Koh, and Bryan Hooi. Uncertainty of Thoughts: Uncertainty-Aware Planning Enhances Information Seeking in LLMs. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [25] Wenyue Hua, Lizhou Fan, Lingyao Li, Kai Mei, Jianchao Ji, Yingqiang Ge, Libby Hemphill, and Yongfeng Zhang. War and Peace (WarAgent): Large Language Model-based Multi-Agent Simulation of World Wars. In arXiv:2311.17227 , 2023. [26] Shariq Iqbal, Robby Costales, and Fei Sha. Alma: Hierarchical learning for composite multi-agent tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2022. [27] Jikun Kang, Xin Zhe Li, Xi Chen, Amirreza Kazemi, Qianyi Sun, Boxing Chen, Dong Li, Xu He, Quan He, Feng Wen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Yao. MindStar: Enhancing Math Reasoning in Pre-trained LLMs at Inference Time. In arXiv:2405.16265 , 2024. [28] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. In arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020. [29] Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Communicative Agents for "Mind" Exploration of Large Language Model Society. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [30] Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang Liu. Agent Hospital: A Simulacrum of Hospital with Evolvable Medical Agents. In 

arXiv:2405.02957 , 2024. [31] Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang, Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, Jacob Andreas, Igor Mordatch, Antonio Torralba, and Yuke Zhu. Pre-trained Language Models for Interactive Decision-making. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,2022. [32] Zhongyang Li, Xiao Ding, and Ting Liu. Generating Reasonable and Diversified Story Ending using Sequence to Sequence Model with Adversarial Training. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING) , 2018. [33] Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [34] Bo Liu, Qiang Liu, Peter Stone, Animesh Garg, Yuke Zhu, and Animashree Anandkumar. Coach-player multi-agent reinforcement learning for dynamic team composition, 2021. 12 [35] Zhiwei Liu, Weiran Yao, Jianguo Zhang, Le Xue, Shelby Heinecke, Rithesh R N, Yihao Feng, Zeyuan Chen, Juan Carlos Niebles, Devansh Arpit, Ran Xu, Phil L Mui, Huan Wang, Caiming Xiong, and Silvio Savarese. BOLAA: Benchmarking and Orchestrating LLM Autonomous Agents. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Large Language Model (LLM) Agents , 2024. [36] Zijun Liu, Yanzhe Zhang, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Diyi Yang. A Dynamic LLM-Powered Agent Network for Task-Oriented Agent Collaboration. In First Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) , 2024. [37] Do Xuan Long, Duong Ngoc Yen, Anh Tuan Luu, Kenji Kawaguchi, Min-Yen Kan, and Nancy F. Chen. Multi-expert Prompting Improves Reliability, Safety and Usefulness of Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , 2024. [38] Kaixin Ma, Hongming Zhang, Hongwei Wang, Xiaoman Pan, and Dong Yu. LASER: LLM Agent with State-Space Exploration for Web Navigation. In NeurIPS 2023 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop , 2023. [39] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Peter Clark. SELF-REFINE: iterative refinement with self-feedback. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [40] Lina Mezghani, Piotr Bojanowski, Karteek Alahari, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Think Before You Act: Unified Policy for Interleaving Language Reasoning with Actions. In Workshop on Reincarnating Reinforcement Learning at ICLR , 2023. [41] Ali Modarressi, Ayyoob Imani, Mohsen Fayyaz, and Hinrich Schuetze. RET-LLM: Towards a general read-write memory for large language models. In ICLR 2024 Workshop: How Far Are We From AGI , 2024. [42] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior. In 

Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST) , 2023. [43] Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan MA, Jiahang Xu, Li Lyna Zhang, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Mutual Reasoning Makes Smaller LLMs Stronger Problem-Solver. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [44] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ChatDev: Communicative Agents for Software Development. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , August 2024. [45] Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, YiFei Wang, Wei Liu, Kunlun Zhu, Hanchen Xia, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Scaling Large Language Model-based Multi-Agent Collaboration. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [46] Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Ningyu Zhang, Yuqi Zhu, Xiang Chen, Shumin Deng, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Agent planning with world knowledge model. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [47] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. ToolLLM: Facilitating Large Language Models to Master 16000+ Real-World APIs. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2024. [48] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language Models Are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. In OpenAI blog , 2019. 13 [49] Toran Bruce Richards. AutoGPT. In https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT , 2023. [50] Nikhil Sardana, Jacob Portes, Sasha Doubov, and Jonathan Frankle. Beyond chinchilla-optimal: accounting for inference in language model scaling laws. In Proceedings of the 41st Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. [51] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessi, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [52] Murray Shanahan, Kyle McDonell, and Laria Reynolds. Role play with large language models. In Nature , 2023. [53] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. In arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024. [54] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [55] Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mot-taghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. [56] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning Text and Embodied Environments for Interactive Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. [57] Chan Hee Song, Jiaman Wu, Clayton Washington, Brian M. Sadler, Wei-Lun Chao, and Yu Su. Llm-planner: Few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large language models. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , October 2023. [58] Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas Griffiths. Cognitive Ar-chitectures for Language Agents. In Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) ,2024. [59] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning. In Cognitive Neuroscience ,1999. [60] Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy Gradient Methods for Reinforcement Learning with Function Approximation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 1999. [61] Xiangru Tang, Anni Zou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Ziming Li, Yilun Zhao, Xingyao Zhang, Arman Cohan, and Mark Gerstein. MedAgents: Large Language Models as Collaborators for Zero-shot Medical Reasoning. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2024. [62] Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. On the Planning Abilities of Large Language Models - A Critical Investigation. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [63] Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Yuhuai Wu, Remi Leblond, and Joel Z. Leibo. Options as responses: Grounding behavioural hierarchies in multi-agent rl, 2020. [64] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models. In Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) , 2024. [65] Tonghan Wang, Tarun Gupta, Anuj Mahajan, Bei Peng, Shimon Whiteson, and Chongjie Zhang. {RODE}: Learning roles to decompose multi-agent tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. 14 [66] Xinyuan Wang, Chenxi Li, Zhen Wang, Fan Bai, Haotian Luo, Jiayou Zhang, Nebojsa Jojic, Eric Xing, and Zhiting Hu. PromptAgent: Strategic Planning with Language Models Enables Expert-level Prompt Optimization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [67] Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang, Rongqi Fan, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. MMLU-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (NeurIPS) , 2024. [68] Zhilin Wang, Alexander Bukharin, Olivier Delalleau, Daniel Egert, Gerald Shen, Jiaqi Zeng, Oleksii Kuchaiev, and Yi Dong. HelpSteer2-Preference: Complementing Ratings with Prefer-ences. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [69] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models. In Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) , 2022. [70] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 35, 2022. [71] Lilian Weng. LLM-powered Autonomous Agents. In lilianweng.github.io , Jun 2023. [72] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) , 2024. [73] Zelai Xu, Chao Yu, Fei Fang, Yu Wang, and Yi Wu. Language Agents with Reinforcement Learning for Strategic Play in the Werewolf Game. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. [74] Xue Yan, Yan Song, Xidong Feng, Mengyue Yang, Haifeng Zhang, Haitham Bou Am-mar, and Jun Wang. Efficient reinforcement learning with large language model priors. In 

arXiv:2410.07927 , 2024. [75] Rui Yang, Lin Song, Yanwei Li, Sijie Zhao, Yixiao Ge, Xiu Li, and Ying Shan. GPT4Tools: Teaching Large Language Model to Use Tools via Self-instruction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. [76] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with Large Language Models. In 

Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 36, 2023. [77] Rui Ye, Shuo Tang, Rui Ge, Yaxin Du, Zhenfei Yin, Siheng Chen, and Jing Shao. MAS-GPT: Training LLMs to Build LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems. In arXiv:2503.03686 , 2025. [78] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and Deqing Yang. EvoAgent: Towards Automatic Multi-Agent Generation via Evolutionary Algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) , April 2025. [79] Zheni Zeng, Bangchen Yin, Shipeng Wang, Jiarui Liu, Cheng Yang, Haishen Yao, Xingzhi Sun, Maosong Sun, Guotong Xie, and Zhiyuan Liu. ChatMol: Interactive Molecular Discovery with Natural Language. In Bioinformatics , 2024. [80] An Zhang, Yuxin Chen, Leheng Sheng, Xiang Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. On Generative Agents in Recommendation. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR) , 2024. 15 [81] Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. AFlow: Automating Agentic Workflow Generation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. [82] Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang. Language agent tree search unifies reasoning, acting, and planning in language models. In 

Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. [83] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. WebArena: A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents. In arXiv:2307.13854 , 2024. [84] Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Long Li, Jialong Wu, Tiannan Wang, Shi Qiu, Jintian Zhang, Jing Chen, Ruipu Wu, Shuai Wang, Shiding Zhu, Jiyu Chen, Wentao Zhang, Xiangru Tang, Ningyu Zhang, Huajun Chen, Peng Cui, and Mrinmaya Sachan. Agents: An Open-source Framework for Autonomous Language Agents. In arXiv:2309.07870 , 2023. [85] Yuchen Zhuang, Xiang Chen, Tong Yu, Saayan Mitra, Victor Bursztyn, Ryan A. Rossi, Somdeb Sarkhel, and Chao Zhang. ToolChain*: Efficient Action Space Navigation in Large Language Models with A* Search. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [86] Yuchen Zhuang, Yue Yu, Kuan Wang, Haotian Sun, and Chao Zhang. ToolQA: A Dataset for LLM Question Answering with External Tools. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (NeurIPS) , 2023. [87] Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. GPTSwarm: Language Agents as Optimizable Graphs. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. 16 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper elaborates the limitations in section D. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions ( e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] 17 Justification: The paper does not include theoretical results. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] . Justification: The paper provide the method details in Method part. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model ( e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model ( e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model ( e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way ( e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? 18 Answer: [Yes] Justification: The code and data are provided in the supplementary materials under the file name code.zip. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution ( e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details ( e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Details are listed in the method part. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We performed significance testing on the data presented in our table 1, and we use the † symbol in the table to denote statistically significant results. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given ( e.g., Normally distributed errors). 19 • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The token cost is specifically discussed in Fig 2, and the full results are listed in A.1 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper ( e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: The research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity ( e.g., if there is a special consider-ation due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper presents a technical contribution without immediate real-world deployment, and thus discussion of societal impacts is not applicable at this stage. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. 20 • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies ( e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse ( e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper has no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets ( e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper cites all the papers related. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license ( e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source ( e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. 21 • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

22 Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper focuses on LLM-based agents, and the use of LLMs is clearly described as an essential and original part of the core method. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM ) for what should or should not be described. 23 Appendix 

This appendix complements the main paper by presenting extended evaluation results, detailed implementation configurations of the agents, and a discussion of current limitations. 

A Supplementary Evaluation 

A.1 Token Cost Analysis 

As discussed in Section 3.2, we present here the full set of cost-related results under both the mono-agent and multi-agent settings, covering the Titan and Mimas subspaces. While the main text only reports the results for the multi setting on the Titan subspace, we provide here the remaining three sets of results for completeness: (1) mono on Titan, (2) mono on Mimas, and (3) multi on Mimas. These supplementary results allow for a more comprehensive comparison across different agent configurations and subspace settings. As discussed in Section 3.2, we focus on two key metrics: token consumption and the number of orchestrated agents per reasoning trajectory. While the multi setting has already been analyzed in the main paper, here we focus on the mono setting. In the Titan subspace, the observed reduction in token consumption across most tasks in Figure 8 can be primarily attributed to shorter reasoning paths. However, for GSM-hard tasks, the number of agents involved remains relatively stable. This suggests that the cost reduction may stem not from fewer agents but from selecting agents that are prompted with fewer tokens, or from utilizing more concise prompts for the same agents. In the Mimas space, token consumption in Figure 8 decreases for certain tasks, while for others, no consistent downward trend is observed. This can be attributed to the fact that, under the mono-agent setting, all agents share the same base model, making it more challenging to identify agents that are significantly more token-efficient. 

A.2 Performance–Cost Trade-off Improvement 

To demonstrate the overall improvement in reasoning performance along with the associated reduction in token consumption—both attributed to the effectiveness of our reward design—we track the  

> performance cost

score for each sample throughout the entire optimization process. This score is defined as the ratio between task performance ( e.g., accuracy or success rate) and token cost, serving as a comprehensive indicator that jointly reflects solution quality and reasoning efficiency. In the evaluation presented in the main paper, we divide the optimization trajectory into two phases: the initial phase and the evolved phase. This division is introduced solely for evaluation convenience, and does not correspond to any intrinsic change in model behavior. In practice, the online optimization process exhibits a generally monotonic upward trend in performance cost , apart from minor fluctuations caused by the stochastic nature of model generation. This consistent improvement further substantiates the effectiveness of our reinforcement learning approach and the benefits of our reward shaping strategy under both mono-agent and multi-agent settings. Across most tasks, from Figure 9, we observe a clear upward trend in the performance/cost score, indicating that the optimization process leads to both better solutions and more efficient use of tokens. This improvement reflects the ability of the system to identify more suitable agent organizations and reasoning pathways over time. In some cases, the score increases steadily throughout the process, suggesting a smooth convergence toward optimal or near-optimal multi-agent coordination strategies. In other cases, the score initially drops before rising again, which implies that the optimization process explores some less effective multi-agent configurations in early stages but is ultimately able to recover and identify improved structures through continued exploration. This pattern highlights the importance of allowing sufficient exploration in the early optimization phase. However, for a small subset of tasks, the score does not show a significant upward trend throughout the optimization. We consider two possible reasons for this. First, the number of optimization samples used in our current experiments is limited to 200, which may not be sufficient to fully explore the search space or discover high-quality MAS configurations, especially for tasks with more complex reasoning requirements. Second, the current hyperparameter settings, such as the maximum length of agent sequence allowed, may not be well-suited for tasks involving weaker base models. In such cases, achieving high performance may require larger MAS configurations or higher upper bounds on relevant parameters to allow for more extensive coordination and tool usage. 24 CommonGenHard GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD 

Multi-base in Titan Subspace 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

GSM-Hard Data Points GSM-Hard Trendline 

CommonGenHard GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD 

Multi-base in Mimas Subspace 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline Mono-base in Titan Subspace 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

GSM-Hard Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

MMLU-Pro Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

CommonGenHard SRDD Mono-base in Mimas Subspace 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

GSM-Hard Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

MMLU-Pro Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

Token Cost Data Points Token Cost Trendline 

Chain Length Data Points Chain Length Trendline 

CommonGenHard SRDD Figure 8: Evolution of token consumption and the number of orchestrated agents per task for all settings. Trends are fitted using LOWESS (Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing). 25 CommonGenHard   

> Performance-Cost Trade-off Evolution — Puppeteer_mono under Titan Space
> GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline

(a) Puppeteer Mono under Titan subspace Data Points Trendline 

> CommonGenHard

Performance-Cost Trade-off Evolution — Puppeteer under Titan Space   

> GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline

(b) Puppeteer under Titan subspace CommonGenHard   

> Performance-Cost Trade-off Evolution — Puppeteer_mono under Mimas Space
> GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline

(c) Puppeteer Mono under Mimas subspace CommonGenHard 

Performance-Cost Trade-off Evolution — Puppeteer under Mimas Space   

> GSM-Hard MMLU-Pro SRDD
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline
> Data Points Trendline

(d) Puppeteer under Mimas subspace 

Figure 9: Performance–Cost curves representing the ratio between task performance and token cost per agent chain across different subspaces and variants of Puppeteer . Trend lines are smoothed using LOWESS (Locally Weighted Scatterplot Smoothing). These observations suggest that while our reward design provides strong guidance for optimizing agent behavior and token efficiency, further gains may be achieved by increasing the optimization budget or dynamically adapting hyperparameters based on task difficulty or model capability. 

A.3 Emergent Patterns in MAS Behavior 

To further illustrate the behavioral diversity and coordination capabilities of our multi-agent system (MAS), we present visualizations of several representative MAS trajectories guided by the puppeteer. As shown in the figure, these trajectories reveal a variety of emergent patterns, including both previously validated structures and novel organizational behaviors that arise from agent interactions. The visualizations in Figure 10 highlight how the policy organizes into distinct formations and adapt agents dynamically in response to high-level guidance. These patterns not only reflect the effectiveness of the puppeteer in orchestrating agent collaboration, but also demonstrate the capacity of the system to generalize and generate new behaviors beyond those explicitly encoded in the training process. Such structural emergence further underscores the interpretability and robustness of our MAS design. 26 Reasoning Agent_Llama -3.1 -8b  Terminator (a) Chain-of-Thought ConcluderAgent_Claude -3-haiku  (b) Self-Reflective Reasoning Chain QuestionAgent_ Llama -3.1 -8b  

> SummarizerAgent_ Llama -3.1 -8b
> ReflectAgent_ Llama -3.1 -8b

(c) Reasoning then Termination ReflectAgent_Gemini -1.5 -pro  ReflectAgent_Gemini -1.5 -flash 

(d) Two-Agent Communication FileAgent   

> ReflectAgent_mistral -nemo SummirizerAgent_Qwen -2.5 -7b

(e) Three-Agent Communication QuestionAgent _Llama -3.2 -3b  

> ReflectAgent_mistral -nemo QuestionAgent_Qwen -2.5 -14b
> ConcluderAgent_Qwen -2.5 -7b

(f) Four-Agent Communication Terminator  

> ConcluderAgent_Claude -3-haiku
> ModifierAgent_GPT4o -mini PythonAgent_Claude -3-sonnet

(g) Convergent Pattern PythonAgent_GPT4o -mini  

> CriticAgent_Gemini -1.5 -flash
> ModifierAgent_GPT4o -mini
> ReflectAgent_Claude -3-sonnet
> ReflectAgent _Qwen -2.5 -72b

(h) Divergent Pattern CriticAgent_Llama -3.1 -405b     

> WebsiteAgent PythonAgent_Llama -3.1 -405b Terminator
> PlannerAgent_Llama -3.1 -405b ArxivAgent
> ReasoningAgent_Llama -3.1 -405b
> ConcluderAgent_Llama -3.1 -405b
> QuestionAgent_Llama -3.1 -405b

(i) Complex Topology 

Figure 10: Examples of MAS behavior patterns under the puppeteer’s guidance. 

A.4 Generalization to Embodied Environments 

While our main experiments focus on tasks such as reasoning, coding, and writing—which do not involve interaction with external environments—we further demonstrate the applicability of our framework to embodied tasks. These tasks require agents to interact with dynamic environments and perform sequences of actions based on real-time feedback, thus posing additional challenges in planning, reasoning, and decision-making. To showcase this capability, we employ ALFWorld [ 56 ] as the testbed. ALFWorld integrates a simulated embodied environment with natural language interfaces, making it a suitable benchmark that bridges textual reasoning with embodied interaction. In this setting, we configure the agent chain with a maximum length of 50, as embodied tasks typically require multiple steps to complete. We also limit the number of exploration trajectories to 1, due to environment constraints: execution cannot be parallelized, and only one admissible action is allowed per step. This experiment is conducted under the mono setting, where all agents share the same model backbone (GPT-4o-mini). To illustrate how our system operates in embodied settings, we provide a case study visualization using frames saved from the THOR environment (as shown in Figure 11). This example showcases the step-by-step execution of a single task by the agent chain. The successful application of our framework in this setting not only underscores its flexibility across diverse task types, but also demonstrates its extensibility to interactive environments, confirming its potential for integration into broader embodied agent systems that require real-time perception, planning, and execution. 27 Figure 11: The figures illustrate the implementation process of the task “look for the remote control under the floor lamp.” 

B Agent Implementation Details 

B.1 Agent Configuration 

We organize all agent actions into two categories: Tool-use Agent [47 , 85 , 51 ] and Reasoning Agent [ 21 , 43 ] as seen in Table 2. For tool-use agents, their actions involve interacting with external environments, such as querying the web or invoking a code interpreter. In contrast, reasoning patterns reflect the internal cognitive processes of LLMs. Drawing inspiration from prior studies on human reasoning strategies [ 43 , 7, 27 , 21 ], we revisit how humans approach complex reasoning tasks. In practice, individuals adopt diverse strategies: some decompose problems into sub-questions, others solve them directly, and some reframe the problem to emphasize critical constraints. More importantly, humans dynamically adapt their strategies based on the evolving context and problem state. Motivated by these observations, we accordingly design a set of specialized reasoning agents to emulate diverse human strategies. Each agent is equipped with a distinct cognitive role, contributing to a collaborative and adaptive reasoning process. 

B.2 Agent Prompts 

In a multi-agent system, to motivate each agent to act in the desired manner, we define its role through a role prompt and combine it with an action prompt to guide the agent in using tools or following specific reasoning patterns. As inllustrated in Fig 12 and Fig 13, role-conditioned prompts specify the agent’s identity, domain expertise, and intended responsibilities, guiding the behavior of different agents. And we have designed a set of structured prompts to guide the behavior of our prompt-based agent system, which can be categorized into two major types: tool-augmented action prompts and reasoning-mode prompts. Each prompt specifies a well-defined agent action, accompanied by a template for language model invocation. 28 Table 2: Agent Tool-Use and Reasoning Patterns 

Category Name Tool-Use 

read_file search_arxiv search_bing access_website run_python 

Reasoning Patterns 

reasoning critique reflect question summarize conclude modify planning 

Tool-augmented action prompts in Fig 14 are designed to determine the parameters required for invoking external tools through the agent’s environment interface. The goal of these prompts is not to execute the tool directly but to generate structured output that specifies the parameters for tool invocation. For example, such prompts may guide the generation of a search query ( e.g., a paper title or keyword) when retrieving academic papers from arXiv search_arxiv , or determine the URL to be accessed when invoking a web tool access_website . These prompts enable the agent to interface with external systems in a modular and verifiable way by generating the precise input needed to trigger tool execution. 

Reasoning-patterns prompts in Fig 15 and Fig 16 focus on internal cognitive processes, such as planning, reasoning, critique, reflection, or sub-question generation. These prompts do not rely on external tools but activate structured thinking patterns within the model, enabling complex problem-solving and decision-making through purely generative means. 

C Computational Resources 

Resource Specification 

GPU NVIDIA A800, 8 GPUs used Peak GPU Memory Usage 28.8–78.4 GB per GPU Training Time 2–6 hours Variation Source Benchmark differences and task complexity Table 3: Computational resources used for orchestrator training. The table (Table 3) details the average computational resources used for orchestrator training. It is important to note that accurately measuring training costs is non-trivial. Our orchestrator is trained online, with parameter updates interleaved with multi-agent inference, making it difficult to isolate GPU hours solely for training. Moreover, several baselines (e.g., AFlow) rely on LLM-based inference-time search to construct workflows, whereas our method uses online gradient-based optimization. Since these involve fundamentally different resource modalities, direct comparisons of computational cost are not appropriate. 

D Limitations 

Our work introduces a centralized mechanism, the Puppeteer, to organize and optimize multi-agent systems (MAS), progressively improving reasoning performance, and efficiency. However, several limitations remain. The Puppeteer’s optimization currently depends on coarse-grained rewards based only on final outputs and token usage, lacking informative intermediate feedback. Incorporating fine-29 grained supervision, such as step-level correctness, could enhance optimization efficiency. Moreover, the framework assumes a fixed set of agents and tools, limiting adaptability and responsiveness to task variations. Enabling dynamic agent or tool modification during inference would improve flexibility and robustness. Finally, occasional mis-coordination or deceptive agreement among agents suggests the need for more robust interaction protocols and incentive designs. Future efforts may focus on reward shaping and adaptive mechanisms to refine both orchestration and agent-level behaviors, allowing the Puppeteer to make more context-aware and efficient decisions. 30 Figure 12: Tool-use Agent Role Prompts FileAgent 

FileAgent: You are an expert in file handling. Responsible for reading files and extracting relevant information ( read_file ). ArxivAgent 

ArxivAgent: You are an expert in academic research. Responsible for searching relevant papers on arXiv ( search_arxiv ). BingAgent 

BingAgent: You are an expert in web search. Responsible for retrieving information via Bing ( search_bing ). WebsiteAgent 

WebsiteAgent: You are an expert in accessing and parsing websites. Responsible for extracting data from specific URLs ( access_website ). PythonAgent 

PythonAgent: You are an expert in Python programming. Responsible for executing Python code and returning results ( run_python ). 31 Figure 13: Reasoning Agent Role Prompts PlannerAgent 

PlannerAgent: You are an expert in task decomposition and planning. Responsible for generating structured plans to solve complex tasks ( planning ). ReasoningAgent 

ReasoningAgent: You are an expert in logical reasoning. Responsible for synthesizing solutions to sub-problems ( reasoning ). CriticAgent 

CriticAgent: You are an expert in critique and verification. Responsible for identifying flaws and providing feedback on prior reasoning ( critique ). ReflectAgent 

ReflectAgent: You are an expert in metacognitive reflection. Responsible for analyzing the overall reasoning trajectory and proposing improvements ( reflect ). QuestionAgent 

QuestionAgent: You are an expert in problem decomposition. Responsible for generating clarifying or follow-up sub-questions ( question ). SummarizerAgent 

SummarizerAgent: You are an expert in summarization. Responsible for generating concise summaries of intermediate results ( summarize ). ConcluderAgent 

ConcluderAgent: You are an expert in synthesis. Responsible for producing the final conclusions based on collective reasoning outcomes ( conclude ). ModifierAgent 

ModifierAgent: You are an expert in error analysis and correction. Responsible for identify-ing errors and revising prior outputs accordingly ( modify ). 32 Figure 14: Tool-use Prompts search_arxiv You have chosen to search for academic papers on arXiv. Please provide specific terms related to academic research, such as the title of a paper, keywords, or topics in fields like physics, mathematics, computer science, or machine learning. Return in json format. Example: 

{"action": "search_arxiv", "parameter": "quantum computing"} 

search_wiki You have chosen to search for information on Wikipedia. Please provide specific terms like a concept, name, event, or technical term for best results. Return in json format. Example: 

{"action": "search_wiki", "parameter": "Albert Einstein"} 

search_bing You have chosen to search for information using Bing. Please provide descriptive phrases or keywords related to your query, including concepts, names, events, or specific questions to get a broad range of results, including news, articles, and websites. Return in json format. Example: {"action": "search_bing", "parameter": "latest advancements in AI"} 

access_website You have chosen to access a website. Please provide the URL you want to access or the URL most relevant to the current question. Return in json format. Example: {"action": "access_website", "parameter": "https://www.example.com"} 

run_python You have chosen to write and run Python code. Please write generic Python code in the parameter to solve this type of problems using only standard python libraries. Make sure you use the print function for all output when relevant. Return in json format. Example: 

{"action": "run_python", "parameter": "print(’Hello, World!’)"} 

read_file You have chosen to read a file. Please provide the filename you want to read. Return in json format. Example: {"action": "read_file", "parameter": "data.txt"} 

33 Figure 15: Reasoning-pattern Prompts (Part 1) planning Decompose the question and plan the next steps to address the question. You should complete your planning using the following template: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

Your planning should include: reasoning Now, you need to continue the reasoning to get closer to the correct answer. You should finish your reasoning with the following template: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. 

Finish your answer with: 

FINAL ANSWER: [YOUR FINAL ANSWER]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

You need to follow the direction of the reasoning path and go forward: critique You need to critique the previous reasoning. Complete your reasoning using: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. 

Conclude with: 

FINAL ANSWER: [YOUR FINAL ANSWER]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

Consider the following when critiquing: 1. Plausibility: reflect You will be provided with a previous reasoning attempt where you had access to relevant context and were tasked with answering a question. The attempt was unsuccessful either due to an incorrect answer or a phrasing mismatch with the answer key. In a few sentences, diagnose the potential cause of failure or discrepancy, and outline a new, concise, high-level plan to prevent the same issue. Use complete sentences. Reflect on the current state of the task and propose the next steps. Conclude with: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. FINAL ANSWER: [YOUR FINAL ANSWER]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

question Your task is to propose the next sub-question along with its answer. Ensure it logically follows from the previous reasoning and addresses any gaps. Provide a well-reasoned answer, supported by evidence or logical arguments. Conclude with: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. FINAL ANSWER: [YOUR FINAL ANSWER]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

34 Figure 16: Reasoning-pattern Prompts (Part 2) summarize You need to summarize previous results and provide some intermediate conclusions. Finish your reasoning with: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. 

Then: 

FINAL ANSWER: [YOUR FINAL ANSWER]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

Summarize the reasoning paths and provide a final conclusion. conclude You need to conclude the task and provide a final answer. Finish with: 

REASONING RESULT: [YOUR REASONING RESULT]. 

Then: 

FINAL ANSWER: [YOUR FINAL ANSWER]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

modify You need to identify and correct errors in the previous reasoning. Use this template: 

REASONING RESULT: [Clearly state: 1. Which part of the previous reasoning was incorrect 2. Why it was incorrect 3. What is the correct understanding]. 

Then: 

FINAL ANSWER: [Provide the complete corrected answer]. *Your previous reasoning was: {}.* 

Please explicitly point out and correct any errors, misconceptions, or inaccuracies. 35