Title: 2026.acl-long.370.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.370.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:09:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8173–8190 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics Mem2ActBench: A Benchmark for Evaluating Long-Term Memory Utilization in Task-Oriented Autonomous Agents 

Yiting Shen 1,2 , Kun Li 1,2* , Wei Zhou 1,2* , Songlin Hu 1,2* 

1Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

2School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 

{shenyiting,likun2,zhouwei,husonglin}@iie.ac.cn 

∗Corresponding authors. 

Abstract 

Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents are increasingly deployed for complex, tool-based tasks where long-term memory is crit-ical to driving actions. Existing benchmarks, however, primarily test an agent’s ability to passively retrieve isolated facts in response to explicit questions. They fail to evaluate the more crucial capability of actively apply-ing memory to execute tasks. To address this gap, we introduce M EM 2A CT BENCH , a benchmark for evaluating whether agents can proactively leverage long-term memory to ex-ecute tool-based actions by selecting appro-priate tools and grounding their parameters. The benchmark simulates persistent assistant usage, where users mention the same topic across long, interrupted interactions and ex-pect previously established preferences and task states to be implicitly applied. We build the dataset with an automated pipeline that merges heterogeneous sources (ToolACE, BFCL, OASST1), resolves conflicts via con-sistency modeling, and synthesizes 2,029 ses-sions with 12 user–assistant–tool turns on average. From these memory chains, areverse-generation method produces 400 tool-use tasks, with human evaluation confirming 91.3% are strongly memory-dependent. Ex-periments on seven memory frameworks show that current systems remain inadequate at ac-tively utilizing memory for parameter ground-ing, highlighting the need for more effec-tive approaches to evaluate and improve mem-ory application in task execution. Code and data are available at https://github.com/ Cantaloupe-M/Mem2ActBench .

1 Introduction 

Large language model (LLM)-based agents are in-creasingly used as persistent assistants, interacting with users over extended periods. In these sce-narios, users rarely restate all task constraints ex-plicitly. Instead, preferences, requirements, and Long-term Conversation History   

> Turn 120: "I only consider nonstop fl ights. "
> Existing Paradigm : Fact Retrieval
> Mem2ActBench Paradigm: Memory Driven Task
> Turn 5:
> "My budget is $500."
> Agent Reasoning Engine
> Budget: $500
> Preference: nonstop
> Long-term Memory
> Destination: NYC
> Time: Next Week
> Task Context
> Evaluation Task
> (Question)
> "What is the user's budget?"
> Output
> (Answer)
> $500
> Evaluation Task
> (Instruction)
> "Help me book a
> fl ight to New York for next week"
> Output
> (Tool Call)
> search_ fl ights
> (destination="NYC", max_price=500, non_stop=True, time="next week")

Figure 1: Fact retrieval vs. memory-driven task ex-ecution. Existing benchmarks focus on direct queries for a factual answer. In contrast, our benchmark re-quires the agent to combine past memories and gener-ate a grounded tool call. 

partial task states are gradually established across prior interactions, often interrupted by unrelated conversations, and are implicitly assumed to be re-membered and applied in later requests. A realis-tic assistant is therefore expected not only to store long-term memory, but to actively retrieve and ap-ply relevant past information to execute concrete actions, such as grounding missing arguments in tool invocations. Current memory benchmarks pri-marily test an agent’s ability to retrieve isolated information from memory based on explicit ques-tions, such as MSC (Xu et al., 2022) and Lo-

8173 como (Maharana et al., 2024) (e.g., "What is the user’s budget?"), but may under-test a more realis-tic challenge: given an underspecified instruction, the agent must infer what constraints to retrieve from long-term memory and ground them into an executable tool invocation, as shown in Figure 1. To bridge this gap, we introduce 

MEM 2A CT BENCH , a benchmark that evalu-ates whether agents can reconstruct executable tool arguments from dispersed long-term mem-ory. Unlike prior benchmarks that test explicit memory retrieval, MEM 2A CT BENCH models scenarios where task is clear but critical exe-cution constraints are distributed across long, interruption-heavy histories. Each instance is constructed so that the correct tool invocation is uniquely grounded in memory but cannot be inferred from the final query alone. We construct an automated pipeline to interleave task-oriented tool-use data with natural dialogue to construct long-term interaction histories that reflect realistic assistant usage. To transform these histories into usable long-term memory, we resolve conflicting states and organize extracted facts into a coherent memory evolution chain that captures how topics are updated over time, before applying reverse query generation with strict leakage control to ensure genuine memory dependence. The main contributions of this work are: • We introduce a principled benchmark de-sign for evaluating inference-driven long-term memory utilization in tool-augmented agents, targeting scenarios where task exe-cution requires grounding underspecified re-quests using historical constraints. • We construct and release M EM 2A CT BENCH ,a benchmark comprising 400 memory-dependent tool-use tasks derived from 2,029 long-context dialogue sessions. Human verification confirms that 91.3% of the tasks cannot be solved without access to long-term memory, ensuring the reliability of the evaluation. • We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of seven representative memory frameworks and systematically analyze their failure modes, revealing persistent bottlenecks in memory retrieval and parameter grounding for tool-using tasks. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Agent Memory Architectures 

For autonomous agents in long-horizon, multi-stage tasks, memory has shifted from passive stor-age to an active module that supports planning and tool use. Existing approaches broadly fall into: (i) extending the context window to include long histories, which can suffer from the “lost-in-the-middle” effect and higher inference cost (Liu et al., 2024); (ii) external memory banks (e.g., vector stores) that retrieve stored interaction fragments or facts on demand, such as RET-LLM (Modar-ressi et al., 2024) and MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2024); and (iii) explicit memory managers that or-ganize and update memory structures, including Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023), MemGPT (Packer et al., 2024), and A-Mem (Xu et al., 2025). Despite these advances, most evaluations still em-phasize memory storage and retrievability , rather than whether agents can decide what to retrieve and how to apply it under tool and task constraints. 

2.2 Agent Memory Benchmarks 

Most memory benchmarks follow an explicit query-based paradigm. Early work targets short-dialogue consistency (e.g., Persona-Chat (Ya-mashita et al., 2023)), while MSC (Xu et al., 2022) extends to cross-session long-term attribute reten-tion. More recent benchmarks, such as LoCoMo (Maharana et al., 2024), LongMemEval (Wu et al., 2024), and MemoryAgentBench (Hu et al., 2025), increase time span and retrieval difficulty, but still largely instantiate “Question → Retrieval → An-swer” with an explicitly provided query. This de-sign under-tests realistic settings where retrieval intent must be inferred from underspecified task demands (e.g., missing tool arguments), rather than directly asked. Tool-oriented benchmarks similarly provide limited coverage of long-term memory usage: even approaches that incorporate memory into tool invocation, such as BFCL-v4 (Patil et al., 2025), typically operate over short in-teraction horizons. As summarized in Table 1, prior benchmarks emphasize explicit query memory matching and static memory usage. M EM 2A CT BENCH instead targets inference-driven long-term memory utiliza-tion, evaluating whether agents can infer task-critical constraints from evolving interaction his-tories and ground them into executable tool calls. 8174 Dataset Session Turns Tokens QA pairs Reasoning Memory Evolution Tool use                                           

> MSC (Xu et al., 2022) 453 564 /Retrieval 77
> MemoryBank (Zhong et al., 2024) 10 38 3094 7Retrieval ✓7
> Locomo (Maharana et al., 2024) 27.2 21.6 16618.1 199 Retrieval ✓7
> DialSim (Kim et al., 2025) 1313 1310 352k 1056 Retrieval ✓7
> LongmemEval (Wu et al., 2024) 48 / 500 10.34 115k / 1.5M 500 Retrieval ✓7
> Mem2ActBench (Our work) 2029 12 3238 400 Inference ✓✓

Table 1: Comparison of representative agent-memory benchmarks. Session is the number of discrete conversa-tion segments per sample (temporal span); Turns is the total dialogue turns (interaction length); Tokens is the total token count aggregated over all sessions (text scale); QA pairs is the number of question–answer instances used for evaluation; Reasoning indicates whether tasks primarily test factual retrieval or inference; Memory Evolution 

indicates whether memory states are dynamically updated during interaction; Tool use indicates whether external tool invocation is supported in evaluation. 

3 Methodology 

3.1 Overview 

To evaluate an agent’s ability to proactively apply long-term memory for task execution, we intro-duce M EM 2A CT BENCH , constructed via a three-stage automated pipeline. First, we simulate realis-tic, interruption-heavy interactions by interleaving task-oriented data with conversational noise, creat-ing fragmented contexts that necessitate long-term memory. Next, we synthesize these interactions into a logically coherent Fact Evolution Chain to serve as a ground-truth memory. Finally, we employ a reverse-generation paradigm, creating underspecified queries derived from ground-truth tool calls. This design ensures that successful task completion strictly requires reasoning over the his-torical memory chain, thereby directly evaluating the agent’s ability to apply memory for inference-driven tasks rather than just retrieving facts. 

3.2 Heterogeneous Data Integration Task-oriented Dialogue. We construct the dataset by synthesizing multi-step tool-use trajec-tories from ToolACE and BFCL via LLM-based generation. For ToolACE (Liu et al., 2025), we process 8,000 samples, parsing raw interaction traces and employing LLM to reconstruct them into coherent, natural multi-turn dialogues. For BFCL_v3 (Patil et al., 2025), we aggregate diverse subsets (including live, parallel, and multi-turn scenarios). Using the same synthesis approach, we transform static task queries and ground-truth tool calls into dynamic multi-round conversations, ensuring the dataset faithfully reflects realistic user-assistant interactions and precise tool execution flows. 

Conversational Noise. We inject conversational noise from OASST1 (Köpf et al., 2023), a tree-structured corpus with ranked assistant candidates. We keep only rank=0 responses and reconstruct full threads by tracing selected leaves to the root. We collect these dialogues and normalize them into a unified multi-turn format. After alignment, all processed interactions serve as the historical dialogue repository for subsequent memory con-struction and task generation. Details are provided in Appendix A. 

3.3 Constructing the Fact Evolution Chain 3.3.1 Fact Extraction and Grouping 

We prompt an LLM to extract structured facts from each dialogue. Each fact is represented as a triple ( attribute , fact , source ID ), where fact is the atomic user statement and source ID uniquely identifies the originating dialogue. To prevent un-related events from being merged under overly generic labels, we instruct the LLM to produce entity-bound attributes whenever applicable (e.g., account modification (YouTube)), which reduces spurious cross-entity comparisons. We then cluster the extracted attributes using 

BERTopic (Grootendorst, 2022) with HDBSCAN as backend. For each cluster, we select one at-tribute as the canonical representative and map all attributes in the cluster to it, flagged as outliers. The resulting attribute clusters are used as fact groups for subsequent conflict detection and evo-lution analysis. 

3.3.2 Memory Evolution Chain Construction Local Conflict Resolution. For each fact group (sharing the same attribute), we use an LLM to produce a locally consistent evolution chain. Con-cretely, the LLM (i) orders facts by their temporal 8175 [Attribute,       

> fact,
> source_id]
> LLM
> {
> "attribute": "Schedule Request (Baseball Game on January 15th, 2024)",
> "facts": "User is requesting the schedule for the upcoming baseball game on January 15th, 2024 ...",
> "source_id": "toolace_6"
> }
> Task-oriented Dialogue
> (ToolACE/BFCL)
> Conversational Noise
> (Oasst1)
> Formatting
> BertTopic
> Youtube
> account
> Restaurants
> Preference
> ... ... ... ...
> Local Conflict Resolution
> ... ... ...
> Global Evolution Sequence Construction
> Local Sorting
> Global Sequence
> Initial Dialogue Pool
> Leakage Detection
> Discriminator LLM
> Human
> Validation Dataset

Heterogeneous Data Integration  Memory Evolution Chain Construction  Memory-anchored Q&A  Construction         

> Fact Extraction
> Can you ...
> Ok sure, ...
> tool_call
> Here is ...
> Thanks ...
> Sure, I will...
> fact4 fact1 fact9
> fact6 fact8
> fact_x fact1 fact6 fact9 fact_y fact8
> Fact Group
> (Restaurants Preference )
> fact6 fact8
> Tool Call with parameter Task Query
> I want to go out to eat tonight. Can you help me find some suitable places?
> "name": "Places Search API",
> "description": "Search local places (restaurants, cafes, etc ...",
> "parameters": {location: Austin, TX ，
> dietary_preference: "gluten-free"}
> Fact Evolution Chain
> User's default city for local recommendations is Austin, TX, and prefers gluten-free options when choosing restaurants.
> Reverse Query Generation

Figure 2: This diagram illustrates the M EM 2A CT BENCH framework, a benchmark used to evaluate the long-term memory capabilities of an agent. The framework first constructs a globally consistent and conflict-free "memory evolution chain" by integrating multi-source dialogue data. Then, based on this memory chain, it reverse-engineers question-answering tasks that require long-term memory to correctly select and use tools. Through this automated process, M EM 2A CT BENCH can effectively measure an agent’s ability to proactively use its memory to complete tasks in complex, long dialogues. 

cues, (ii) preserves logically valid updates, such as refinement from coarse to specific (e.g.,sports 

→ basketball) and valid multi-valued trajectories (e.g., residences over time), (iii) removes state-ments that are off-context or in strong logical con-flict with other facts under predefined rules, and (iv) drops near-duplicates that provide no infor-mation gain. The remaining facts are then com-pressed into a clean local sequence, which serves as ordering constraints for global integration. 

Global Evolution Sequence Construction. We merge the local sequences into one global evolu-tion chain. This is achieved by first constructing a dependency graph where facts are nodes and tem-poral orderings are directed edges. Next, we apply a modified topological sorting method based on Kahn’s algorithm. To handle contradictions that manifest as cycles in the graph, we introduce a de-terministic heuristic for conflict resolution. When a cycle is found, we identify the deadlocked nodes and remove the one with the highest out-degree. This removes the fact that forces the most down-stream ordering constraints, which helps restore a valid order. The final outputs are the globally sorted sequence of facts and a list of any conflict-ing facts that were discarded. 

3.4 Memory-anchored Q&A Construction 3.4.1 Target Tool Selection and Parameter Anchoring 

Given a memory evolution chain S, we first con-struct a fully specified gold-standard tool invo-cation C = ( t∗, P ) that is strictly grounded in memory. The target tool t∗ is selected via hy-brid retrieval (BM25 + BGE-M3) followed by LLM-based decision-making. For parameter con-struction, all values in P must be either explic-itly extracted from or logically inferred based on 

S. To prevent spurious or hallucinated parameters, we enforce a memory-anchoring constraint: each parameter is validated through a combination of fuzzy matching and an LLM verifier, ensuring that its value can be traced back to the memory chain. 

3.4.2 Reverse Implicit Query Generation and Filtering 

Starting from the grounded tool invocation C and its supporting memory subset, we reverse-generate an underspecified user query Q. The generation process enforces three critical constraints: (i) Pa-rameter Omission: Key values present in C must be omitted from Q to prevent information leakage; (ii) Reference Dependency: The query must rely on anaphoric expressions (e.g., "book that flight", "use my previous preference"); (iii) Intent Preser-vation: The query must remain semantically con-sistent with the execution of C.To ensure that each generated query is gen-uinely memory-dependent, we first filter out sam-ples that reveal parameter values through explicit mentions or implicit hints. We then introduce a discriminator LLM, which attempts to reconstruct the correct tool invocation C using only the query 

Q and the tools API documentation, without ac-cess to historical memory. A sample is retained only if the discriminator fails, guaranteeing that correct tool invocation is impossible without re-8176 trieving relevant memory. Details are provided in Appendix B. We employ Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-Instruct 1

as the backbone LLM for target tool selection and parameter grounding. For the reverse im-plicit query generation stage, we employ Kimi-K2-Thinking 2. Finally, we generate a total of 400 

memory-dependent tool-use queries grounded in 

2,029 long conversational sessions, with an aver-age of 13 turns per session. These samples con-stitute the final M EM 2A CT BENCH dataset used in all subsequent experiments. 

3.5 Task Formalization 

We define the evaluation task as a conditional gen-eration problem. Given a memory sequence M

and a user query q, the agent generates the optimal tool invocation ˆc by maximizing: 

ˆc = arg max  

> c∈C

P (c | q, M) (1) where c consists of a selected tool T and param-eter values vp. Each vp is derived by reasoning over the context: 

vp = fθ(p, q, M) (2) subject to the constraint that vp is strictly grounded in M.

3.6 Human Verification 

We conduct expert verification to assess the relia-bility of M EM 2A CT BENCH at three critical stages: fact extraction, conflict resolution, and memory-dependent task formulation. A total of five ex-pert annotators, each holding advanced degrees in fields such as Computational Linguistics, Com-puter Science, or Artificial Intelligence, and with prior experience in evaluating AI models, were re-cruited. Each item was independently reviewed by at least two annotators, ensuring thorough evalua-tion. Disagreements between annotators were re-solved through discussion. For fact extraction, annotators judge whether each fact is (i) entailed by the dialogue context and (ii) correctly normalized. For conflict reso-lution, they assess whether the resulting memory         

> 1https://huggingface.co/Qwen/ Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-Instruct
> 2https://huggingface.co/moonshotai/ Kimi-K2-Thinking
> Aspect #Samples Validated (%)
> Fact Extraction Accuracy 200 96.5 Conflict Resolution Quality 150 86.7 Memory Dependency Validity 200 91.3
> Table 2: Expert verification on randomly sampled in-stances from three stages of the M EM 2A CT BENCH
> pipeline.

evolution chain is coherent and logically consis-tent. For memory dependency, annotators deter-mine whether the gold tool invocation remains underdetermined given the user query alone (i.e., would be infeasible to infer without access to long-term memory). As shown in Table 2, we obtain high validation rates across all stages, indicating that M EM 2A CT BENCH provides faithful memory states and that its tool-use tasks intrinsically re-quire memory rather than surface-level reasoning. 

4 Experiment 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets. We selected only the conversation his-tories that contain all the necessary QA evidence, ensuring the original order is preserved, with a to-tal of 429 sessions used. 

Baselines. We evaluate the following representa-tive agent memory systems on M EM 2A CT BENCH :Long-term Memory (RAG), Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023), SCM (Wang et al., 2023), Langmem (LangChain, 2025), MemTree (Reza-zadeh et al., 2024), Mem0 (Chhikara et al., 2025) and A-Mem (Xu et al., 2025). To control for backbone model capacity, we conduct experi-ments using three model scales of the Qwen2.5 family, namely Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct , Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct , and Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct (Qwen Team, 2024), as the inference backbone for all memory systems. All models are evaluated un-der fixed decoding settings (temperature = 0.0) to ensure result stability and comparability across scales. For memory systems involving retrieval, we use BGE-m3 (Chen et al., 2024) as the embed-ding model. 

Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate memory-based tool-call generation with three metrics: F1 

for parameter-level precision/recall, BLEU-1 for unigram overlap with the reference, and Tool Accuracy (TA) , which is True only if the correct tool is used and all parameters match exactly. In 8177 the main results, we provide the ground-truth tool to control for tool-selection errors and focus the comparison on memory-based parameter grounding. 

4.2 Main Results 

Table 3 suggests that TA stays tightly clustered (∼87–97%) and changes little from 32B to 72B on average, indicating that most remaining errors are not structural but semantic. In contrast, ar-gument grounding shows clear headroom: mean F1 increases from 20.4 (7B) to 28.9 (72B), with diminishing returns beyond 32B ( ≈ +3 .5 F1 from 32B →72B), implying that scaling mainly im-proves post-retrieval composition. The method ranking reveals that A-mem and LTMemory form the top cluster (72B F1 =35.9/35.3) and nearly con-verge at scale, while MemoryTree remains com-petitive (33.2) but retains a ∼2–3 F1 gap, suggest-ing structured memory helps but does not fully resolve parameter assembly. Notably, the largest scaling gain appears in weaker memory managers (e.g., Mem0: +14 .7 F1 from 7B →72B), consis-tent with larger models compensating via stronger cross-turn inference when memory organization is suboptimal. 

5 Discussions 

5.1 Retriever Analysis 

To probe whether performance is mainly limited by memory retrieval rather than reasoning, we conduct a controlled comparison across three re-trieval conditions (no retrieval, passive retrieval with standard retrievers, and oracle retrieval with ground-truth memories. As shown in Table 4, the best passive retrieval result is achieved by the hy-brid retriever at k=5 , reaching F 1 ≈ 30 .7. In contrast, oracle retrieval boosts performance to 

F 1 ≈ 53 .8, creating a gap of over 23 F1 points. This large margin suggests that the dominant bot-tleneck is evidence hitting/retrieval quality, rather than the model’s pure reasoning once the correct supporting memories are available. This find-ing aligns with our benchmark goal of evaluat-ing memory application for parameter grounding under underspecified requests: improving perfor-mance requires stronger evidence-hitting mecha-nisms (e.g., better indexing, retriever training, and query formulation) rather than simply scaling the backbone model. 0-25% 25-50% 50-75% 75-100% 

> Memory Position (%)
> 20 30 40
> F1 Score (%)
> A-mem Generative Agents LTMemory LangMemMemory Mem0 MemoryTree SCM

Figure 3: F1 score versus the normalized position of the earliest supporting memory. 

5.2 Impact of Memory Distance 

While the main results demonstrate the overall ca-pability of memory models in tool-use tasks, a critical question remains: does the physical dis-tance between the relevant memory and the cur-rent query affect the model’s reasoning perfor-mance? Existing research on long-context LLMs suggests a "lost-in-the-middle" phenomenon or performance degradation as key information re-cedes further into the history. To investigate this in the context of M EM 2A CT BENCH , we conducted a fine-grained analysis of model performance rel-ative to the "memory distance". For each sample, we identify the earliest turn that provides evidence for any required tool parameter, denoted tearliest ,within a conversation of length L. We use the normalized position Pmem = tearliest /L and bucket samples into four quartiles (0–25%, 25–50%, 50– 75%, 75–100%). 

Findings. Figure 3 reveals a pronounced posi-tional bias: most baselines achieve higher F1 when the supporting evidence appears in the early (0–25%) or recent (75–100%) context, but drop sharply when it lies in the mid-history (25–50%), forming a clear mid-context valley. A-mem falls from ∼36% to ∼25% in the 25–50% bin, echoing a “lost-in-the-middle”-like failure in tool-use. By contrast, LTMemory is more position-robust, with F1 remaining above 30% across bins. These re-sults directly support that even with retrieval, long-term memory is not reliably applied for parame-ter grounding when evidence is buried in the mid-dle of lengthy interaction histories, leaving mid-context usage as a key bottleneck for memory-8178 Method Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Average F1 BLEU TA F1 BLEU TA F1 BLEU TA F1 BLEU TA 

LTMemory 35.32 67.93 92.00 33.87 67.71 90.20 26.71 64.07 87.25 31.97 66.57 89.82 SCM (Wang et al., 2023) 22.73 62.04 96.25 17.35 59.37 95.75 14.99 57.37 91.00 18.36 59.59 94.33 Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023) 22.38 62.58 95.50 17.81 59.76 96.24 14.44 55.59 89.75 18.21 59.31 93.83 MemTree (Rezazadeh et al., 2024) 33.21 68.17 94.25 31.89 67.69 94.50 24.60 63.91 88.50 29.90 66.59 92.42 Mem0 (Chhikara et al., 2025) 28.95 66.47 96.75 24.52 64.36 97.00 14.21 57.37 93.97 22.56 62.73 95.91 Langmem (LangChain, 2025) 24.01 63.06 96.25 18.72 58.27 97.25 17.06 58.93 96.50 19.93 60.09 96.67 

A-mem (Xu et al., 2025) 35.93 67.93 93.25 33.72 67.92 92.25 30.99 66.47 94.75 33.55 67.44 93.42 

Table 3: Experimental results for different memory methods across multiple model sizes. Table 4: Performance comparison under varying top-k

retrieval settings. Shading in the Recall@k column in-dicates retrieval depth (darker denotes more retrieved documents). Best results among passive retrieval meth-ods are highlighted in bold. 

Retrieval Strategy Recall@k F1 BLEU TSA 

No Retrieval – 10.0 8.9 73.8 

Passive Retrieval 

BM25 1 29.0 28.0 87.0 5 26.9 26.2 90.2 10 27.6 26.7 87.5 Dense 1 25.6 25.3 83.0 5 29.9 29.1 90.0 10 28.7 28.3 88.8 Hybrid 1 24.9 24.3 85.0 5 30.7 29.7 86.0 10 30.3 29.5 88.8 

Perfect Retrieval 

Oracle – 53.8 53.7 88.2 

centric tool agents. 

5.3 Parameter Grounding and Complexity 

To figure out where argument grounding fails, we report Slot Accuracy , as the exact match of each individual argument value, and break it down by grounding type and value complexity. 

Grounding Type Analysis. We categorize pa-rameters by how their values are supported in the dialogue history: Explicit (directly stated, e.g., “New York”), Inferred (needs a semantic conver-sion, e.g., “upcoming week” → days=7 ), and De-fault (not mentioned and should be filled from the tool schema). For 72B-scale models, Explicit and Inferred show a small gap, indicating that once the right ev-idence is retrieved, semantic transformation is not the main difficulty. The largest errors come from Default values: models often fail to notice that a value was never specified, and instead generate a plausible default, sometimes guided by distractors in long histories (Figure 4). A-mem Generative Agents LTMemory MemoryTree SCM langmem mem0 

> 020 40 60 80
> Slot Accuracy (%)
> Parameter Accuracy by Grounding Type
> Explicit Inferred Default A-mem Generative Agents LTMemory MemoryTree SCM langmem mem0
> 020 40 60 80
> Slot Accuracy (%)
> Parameter Accuracy by Value Complexity
> Simple String Number Boolean Complex

Figure 4: Breakdown of Slot Accuracy by Value Com-plexity (top) and Grounding Type (bottom). 

Value Complexity. We further bucket values as 

Simple String (≤30 chars), Number , Boolean ,and Complex (long strings, specialized identifiers such as URLs/addresses, or nested structures). Slot Accuracy decreases as values become more complex. Models handle Simple Strings and Numbers reasonably well, but performance drops sharply on Complex values, which points to weak lossless retention (e.g., truncation or character-level corruption of identifiers). Boolean accuracy also varies across frameworks, indicating that it de-pends on both the grounding context and how each system enforces tool constraints (Figure 4). 

5.4 Tool Selection Robustness 

We stress-test tool choice by increasing the can-didate set to N ∈ {1, 2, 5}, where each query is paired with N − 1 distractor tools. Distrac-8179 Candidate size N 1 2 5

Random negatives 

TSA ( ↑) 94.50 95.50 93.50 EM ( ↑) 18.25 18.00 17.00 Arg_F1 ( ↑) 29.88 29.98 28.27 

Hard negatives 

TSA ( ↑) 94.50 78.00 69.75 EM ( ↑) 18.25 16.50 14.25 Arg_F1( ↑) 29.88 27.17 22.64 

Table 5: Tool selection robustness under different can-didate tool set sizes ( N ∈ { 1, 2, 5}). 

tors are sampled either randomly (uniformly from the tool library) or as hard negatives (distrac-tor tools most semantically similar to the ground-truth tool), which tests fine-grained intent separa-tion (e.g., search vs. book ). We report Tool Selec-tion Accuracy (TSA) and end-to-end Exact Match (EM) (correct tool and all arguments). For diagno-sis, we also report Arg_F1 conditioned on select-ing the correct tool. Table 5 shows that with random negatives, TSA remains high and nearly unchanged (93.50– 95.50%) as N increases, suggesting that models handle unrelated distractors well. In contrast, hard negatives cause a steep drop in TSA, from 94.50% (N =1 ) to 69.75% ( N =5 ), indicating difficulty when tool semantics overlap. EM stays low in all settings (14.25–18.25%), even when TSA is above 93%, which suggests that argument ground-ing is the main bottleneck. This is also reflected in Arg_F1: under hard negatives (given the correct tool), it decreases from 29.88 to 22.64, implying that similar distractors can also hurt parameter ex-traction and inference. 

5.5 Error Mode Diagnosis 

To characterize why agents fail on memory-grounded parameter filling, we conduct a fine-grained attribution analysis over erroneous predic-tions. We categorize failures into five types: (i) Retrieval Miss , required evidence is absent from retrieved context; (ii) Retrieved-but-Unused , ev-idence is retrieved but not utilized; (iii) Hallu-cinated Default , schema defaults are incorrectly overridden or fabricated; (iv) Lossless Retention Failure , long/structured values are corrupted (e.g., truncation or character-level errors); and (v) Tool Selection Error , an incorrect tool is selected. A-Mem LTMemory MemoryTree GA-Memory SCMemory Hybrid@5 025 50 75 100 

> Proportion (%)
> Retrieval Miss Retrieved-but-Unused Hallucinated Default Lossless Retention Failure Tool Selection Error

Figure 5: Distribution of failure modes across different memory frameworks. 

Findings. Figure 5 shows that: (i) As memory frameworks become stronger, failures shift from 

accessibility (retrieval misses dominating weak baselines) to post-retrieval reasoning (retrieved-but-unused rising substantially), suggesting re-trieval alone is insufficient. (ii) Tool selection is largely robust: agentic frameworks exhibit neg-ligible tool selection errors, while a passive re-trieval baseline shows a noticeable fraction of tool-selection failures. (iii) Retrieval Miss remains the largest category even for strong systems, highlight-ing the enduring difficulty of locating sparse but critical evidence under implicit queries. 

5.6 Mitigation Strategies 

To address the pronounced performance drops in mid-context retrieval and parameter grounding, we evaluate three potential mitigation strategies on a subset of 200 samples from M EM 2A CT BENCH 

using Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct: • Query Expansion (Preventive) : Generating multiple tool-specific search queries to im-prove recall. • Self-Refine (Targeted) : A reasoning loop where the agent triggers <SELF_REFINE> to re-retrieve missing parameters instead of hal-lucinating. • Interactive Clarification: Using an Oracle User (responding based strictly on histori-cal fragments) to resolve ambiguities via a 

<CLARIFY> tag. As shown in Table 6, Query Expansion yields consistent gains in Parameter F1 and BLEU-1, 8180 Table 6: Performance of mitigation strategies on a 200-sample subset using Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct.                

> Strategy TA F1 BLEU-1 Baseline (LTMemory) 92.00% 29.24 50.64 Query Expansion 91.50% 32.42 53.07 Self-Refine 94.00% 29.68 51.73 Interactive Clarification 87.25% 48.68 61.89

supporting the hypothesis that mid-context fail-ures are heavily tied to retrieval-hit issues. Self-Refine improves Tool Accuracy but offers only marginal gains in parameter grounding, suggest-ing that it struggles when the initial context lacks sufficient hints to formulate more effective follow-up searches. Finally, Interactive Clarification sub-stantially raises Parameter F1 to 48.68. Although it is not strictly comparable to the single-turn set-ting, since it introduces multi-turn decision points and alters the task definition, it serves as a strong diagnostic upper bound. This result demonstrates that allowing agents to interactively query the user can effectively bypass static memory retrieval bot-tlenecks. 

6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce M EM 2A CT BENCH 

for evaluating whether tool-augmented agents can effectively apply long-term memory to drive task execution. We construct a benchmark through an automated pipeline that simulates real-world interrupted interactions, generating memory-dependent tool calls. Our experiments re-veal a significant gap in current memory frame-works, particularly in parameter grounding with mid-context memories often overlooked. These re-sults highlight the limitations of current systems in proactively utilizing long-term memory, especially when tasks are underspecified. Future research should focus on enhancing the active utilization of memory, particularly in scenarios that require rea-soning over dispersed, incomplete information. 

Limitations 

MEM 2A CT BENCH is designed to evaluate memory-grounded parameterization in tool-based tasks under controlled conditions. However, it is limited to offline tool-call generation and uses a fixed backbone model family, primarily to control backbone variation and because agentic memory frameworks incur substantial per-turn inference cost, making broad cross-family evaluation expensive in our setting. The benchmark also excludes interactive execution settings, where agents adapt to feedback over time. Additionally, while automated task generation helps scale the dataset, it may not fully capture the complexities of real-world dialogues. Lastly, human verifica-tion introduces potential biases in the validation process, especially in edge cases. 

Ethical considerations 

MEM 2A CT BENCH is constructed by synthesiz-ing interaction histories from publicly available datasets, including task-oriented tool-use data from ToolACE and BFCL, and conversational con-tent from OpenAssistant (OASST1). No new data were collected from end users or through human-subject experiments. Following the ethical prac-tices described by these source datasets and the ACL ethics guidance, we take steps to reduce privacy risks by releasing only processed bench-mark instances necessary for evaluating memory-grounded tool use, and by applying automated redaction or rewriting to remove obvious person-ally identifiable information (e.g., emails, phone numbers, account identifiers) when encountered. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Chinese national-level Youth Talent Program. 

References                                   

> Jianlyu Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. 2024. M3-embedding: Multi-linguality, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024 , pages 2318–2335. Prateek Chhikara, Dev Khant, Saket Aryan, Taranjeet Singh, and Deshraj Yadav. 2025. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. Preprint , arXiv:2504.19413. Maarten Grootendorst. 2022. Bertopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-based tf-idf procedure. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05794 .Yuanzhe Hu, Yu Wang, and Julian McAuley. 2025. Evaluating memory in llm agents via incre-mental multi-turn interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05257 .

8181 Jiho Kim, Woosog Chay, Hyeonji Hwang, Daeun Kyung, Hyunseung Chung, Eunbyeol Cho, Yeonsu Kwon, Yohan Jo, and Edward Choi. 2025. Di-alsim: A dialogue simulator for evaluating long-term multi-party dialogue understanding of conver-sational agents. Preprint , arXiv:2406.13144. Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi-Rui Tam, Keith Stevens, Abdullah Barhoum, Nguyen Minh Duc, Oliver Stanley, Richárd Nagyfi, Shahul ES, Sameer Suri, David Glushkov, Arnav Dantuluri, Andrew Maguire, Christoph Schuhmann, Huu Nguyen, and Alexan-der Mattick. 2023. Openassistant conversations – democratizing large language model alignment. 

Preprint , arXiv:2304.07327. LangChain. 2025. Langmem (langchain-ai/langmem). 

https://github.com/langchain-ai/langmem .Version 0.0.30; accessed 2026-01-03. Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173. Weiwen Liu, Xu Huang, Xingshan Zeng, xinlong hao, Shuai Yu, Dexun Li, Shuai Wang, Weinan Gan, Zhengying Liu, Yuanqing Yu, Zezhong WANG, Yuxian Wang, Wu Ning, Yutai Hou, Bin Wang, Chuhan Wu, Wang Xinzhi, Yong Liu, Yasheng Wang, and 8 others. 2025. Toolace: Winning the points of llm function calling. In International Con-ference on Representation Learning , volume 2025, pages 41359–41381. Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei Fang. 2024. Evaluating very long-term conver-sational memory of llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17753 .Ali Modarressi, Ayyoob Imani, Mohsen Fayyaz, and Hinrich Schütze. 2024. Ret-llm: Towards a gen-eral read-write memory for large language models. 

Preprint , arXiv:2305.14322. Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2024. Memgpt: Towards llms as oper-ating systems. Preprint , arXiv:2310.08560. Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive sim-ulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface soft-ware and technology , pages 1–22. Shishir G. Patil, Huanzhi Mao, Charlie Cheng-Jie Ji, Fanjia Yan, Vishnu Suresh, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2025. The berkeley function calling leaderboard (bfcl): From tool use to agentic evalua-tion of large language models. In Forty-second In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning .Qwen Team. 2024. Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models. Alireza Rezazadeh, Zichao Li, Wei Wei, and Yujia Bao. 2024. From isolated conversations to hierarchical schemas: Dynamic tree memory representation for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.14052 .Bing Wang, Xinnian Liang, Jian Yang, Hui Huang, Shuangzhi Wu, Peihao Wu, Lu Lu, Zejun Ma, and Zhoujun Li. 2023. Scm: Enhancing large lan-guage model with self-controlled memory frame-work. arXiv e-prints , pages arXiv–2304. Di Wu, Hongwei Wang, Wenhao Yu, Yuwei Zhang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Dong Yu. 2024. Longmemeval: Benchmarking chat assistants on long-term interac-tive memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10813 .Jing Xu, Arthur Szlam, and Jason Weston. 2022. Be-yond goldfish memory: Long-term open-domain conversation. In Proceedings of the 60th annual meeting of the association for computational linguis-tics (volume 1: long papers) , pages 5180–5197. Wujiang Xu, Zujie Liang, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.12110. Sanae Yamashita, Koji Inoue, Ao Guo, Shota Mochizuki, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Ryuichiro Hi-gashinaka. 2023. Realpersonachat: A realistic per-sona chat corpus with interlocutors own personali-ties. In Proceedings of the 37th Pacific Asia Con-ference on Language, Information and Computation ,pages 852–861. Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence , volume 38, pages 19724–19731. 

A Data Processing Details 

A.1 Pipeline Implementation 

We employ a standardized pipeline to unify hetero-geneous data sources into a consistent multi-turn format. The processing specifics for each source are as follows: • ToolACE Processing: We parse raw interaction traces using a custom stack-based algorithm to handle nested bracket structures (e.g., [Function(args...)] ). These parsed traces are then refined into natural language dialogues using 

Qwen/Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B-Instruct 

(temperature=0.0) to ensure conversational fluidity while preserving execution logic. 8182 • BFCL v3 Synthesis: To transform static query-response pairs into dynamic interac-tions, we utilize the same LLM engine (tem-perature=0.0) to synthesize multi-round his-tories. This involves expanding single-turn ground truths into coherent contexts contain-ing user clarifications and sequential tool in-vocations. • OASST1 Formatting: We reconstruct full conversation threads by tracing leaf nodes to the root, filtering for high-quality responses (rank=0 ). The data is further processed by deduplicating based on the longest conver-sation path per prompt and translating non-English samples to English via the Google Translate API to maintain linguistic consis-tency. 

Data Schema. All processed data is serialized into a unified JSONL format compatible with stan-dard chat completion APIs. Table 7 illustrates a representative sample structure. 

A.2 Fact Extraction, Semantic Clustering, and Local Conflict Resolution 

Our pipeline transforms raw dialogue sessions into a coherent memory structure through three se-quential stages: extracting atomic facts, clustering them by semantic topic, and resolving inconsisten-cies within each local group. 

Fact Extraction. We employ LLM to pro-cess each dialogue session and extract structured facts formatted as triplets: (attribute, fact, source_id) . The attribute functions as a normalized category label (e.g., “Dietary Prefer-ence”), while the fact encapsulates the specific atomic statement derived from the user’s input. To ensure precision and reproducibility in the extrac-tion process, we set the generation temperature to 

0.0.

Semantic Clustering. To unify scattered refer-ences to the same topic across disjointed sessions, we utilize BERTopic for semantic aggregation. First, we generate dense vector representations for all extracted attributes using the BAAI/bge-m3 

embedding model. These embeddings are normal-ized using the L2 norm to ensure consistent dis-tance measures. For the clustering backend, we employ HDBSCAN to identify semantically re-lated attribute groups. Based on our implementa-tion, we configure the algorithm with a minimum 

Table 7: Unified JSON schema used for training, aligned with standard tool-use formats. 

> {"id": "toolace_sample_01", "tools": [ {"type": "function", "function": { "name": "search_api", "description": "Search for information online.", "parameters": { ... } }}], "conversation_history": [ {"role": "user", "content": "Check the weather in NY." }, {"role": "assistant", "content": "I will check the forecast for New York.", "tool_calls": [ {"id": "call_abc123", "type": "function", "function": { "name": "weather_api", "arguments": "{\"location\": \"New York, NY\"}" }}]}, {"role": "tool", "tool_call_id": "call_abc123", "name": "weather_api", "content": "{\"temp\": \"20C\", \"condition\": \"Sunny\"}" }]}

cluster size of 2 ( min_cluster_size=2 ) to cap-ture even sparse thematic connections. We utilize the euclidean metric for distance calculation and set the cluster selection method to leaf with an ep-silon threshold of 0.01 , favoring finer-grained clus-ters over broad generalizations. Post-clustering, all attributes within a cluster are mapped to a sin-gle canonical representative, ensuring a unified namespace for subsequent processing. 

Local Conflict Resolution. Once facts are grouped by their canonical attributes, we perform local conflict resolution to establish a consistent timeline for each topic. We prompt LLM to ana-lyze each cluster. The model performs three key tasks: 1. Chronological Ordering: It deter-8183 mines the logical sequence of events, producing a sorted list of source IDs (sorted_source_ids ) that reflects the true evolution of the user’s status. 2. Conflict Elimination: It identifies and explicitly discards source IDs (discarded_source_ids ) containing obsolete, redundant, or contradictory in-formation that does not fit the coherent narrative. 3. Narrative Synthesis: It generates a natural language summary and a reasoning trace, ex-plaining how the state evolved (e.g., a change in preference) to facilitate interpretability. This hierarchical approach ensures that individual topic histories are locally consistent before they are integrated into the global memory evolution chain. Example shown in Table 8. 

A.3 Algorithm for Global Evolution Sequence Construction 

In this section, we provide the detailed pseu-docode for constructing the Global Evolution Se-quence. We employ a modified topological sorting algorithm based on Kahn’s algorithm. To handle cyclic dependencies (conflicts) arising from merg-ing heterogeneous data sources, we introduce a de-terministic heuristic mechanism. The core of our conflict resolution strategy lies in the Cycle Breaking step. When the topological sort stalls due to a cycle (i.e., no nodes have an in-degree of zero), we explicitly identify the set of deadlocked nodes. From this set, we select a can-didate to discard based on the following priority: 1. Maximum Out-Degree: We prioritize re-moving the node with the highest out-degree. A high out-degree implies that the fact im-poses ordering constraints on many subse-quent facts. Removing it relaxes the graph structure most effectively, allowing the sort-ing process to resume. 2. Lexicographical Order (Tie-breaker): If multiple nodes share the same maximum out-degree, we select the one with the lexico-graphically smallest identifier. This ensures the algorithm is strictly deterministic and re-producible. The complete procedure is outlined in Algo-rithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Global Evolution Sequence Con-struction with Deterministic Conflict Resolution                                                                                                                                       

> Require: Set of local sequences S={S1, S 2, . . . , S n}
> Ensure: Globally sorted sequence G, set of discarded facts
> D
> 1: Initialize:
> 2: Construct directed graph G(V, E )from S
> 3: Compute in-degree deg in (v)and out-degree deg out (v)
> for all v∈V
> 4: Q← { v∈V|deg in (v) = 0 }▷Initialize queue with source nodes 5: Sort Qlexicographically ▷Ensure determinism 6: G←[] ,D←[]
> 7: while |G|+|D|<|V|do
> 8: if Qis not empty then
> 9: u←Q. pop()
> 10: G. append( u)
> 11: for each neighbor vof udo
> 12: deg in (v)←deg in (v)−1
> 13: if deg in (v) = 0 then
> 14: Q. push( v)
> 15: end if
> 16: end for
> 17: else ▷Cycle detected: heuristic conflict resolution 18: Vremain ←V\(G∪D)
> 19: vdrop ←NULL, max _out ← − 1
> 20: for vin Vremain do
> 21: if deg out (v)> max _out then
> 22: vdrop ←v,max _out ←deg out (v)
> 23: else if deg out (v) = max _out and v < v drop
> then
> 24: vdrop ←v▷Lexicographical tie-breaker 25: end if
> 26: end for
> 27: D. append( vdrop )▷Discard the conflicting node 28: for each neighbor vof vdrop do
> 29: deg in (v)←deg in (v)−1
> 30: if deg in (v) = 0 then
> 31: Q. push( v)
> 32: end if
> 33: end for
> 34: end if
> 35: end while
> 36: return G, D

B Quality Control for Reverse Query Generation 

To ensure that the generated user queries ( Q)strictly rely on long-term memory ( M ) to resolve tool parameters ( P ), we implement a filtering pipeline. This process eliminates both surface-level parameter leakage and semantic redundancy where the task is solvable without memory con-text. 

Lexical Leakage Filtering. We first apply a rule-based filter to detect explicit mentions of ground-truth values in Q. This check specifically targets parameters derived from memory (marked as explicit or inferred ), ignoring generic schema defaults. The filter rejects Q if it contains: (1) Ex-act Matches of parameter strings (case-insensitive 8184 Table 8: Memory Evolution Example       

> Item Content
> Attribute Group Dietary Preference (Vegan) Sorted Source IDs [oss_5924, oss_9685, oss_8154, toolace_1099]
> Discarded Source IDs [toolace_518]
> Narrative Summary The user has evolved from a vegetarian diet that included croissants and wine to a strictly vegan lifestyle, with a strong preference for vegetables and high-protein meals. All non-vegan foods, includ-ing fish, are no longer included. Reasoning The preference for fish and vegetables (toolace_518) conflicts with the current vegan requirement (oss_5924) and is therefore discarded. The vegetarian status (toolace_1099) is retained as historical context, reflecting an earlier dietary stage. The current vegan requirement, preference for vegetables, and high-protein intake are retained to represent the complete dietary evolution. Original Facts
> {"toolace_518": { "attribute": "Diet Preference (Fish and Vegetables)", "fact": "User prefers to include fish and vegetables in their diet" }, "toolace_1099": { "attribute": "Dietary Preference (Vegetarian)", "fact": "User is vegetarian and enjoys croissants and wine" }, "oss_5924": { "attribute": "Dietary Preference (Vegan)", "fact": "User requires all lunch options to be vegan" }, "oss_8154": { "attribute": "Food Preferences (Vegetables)", "fact": "User really likes vegetables" }, "oss_9685": { "attribute": "Dietary Preference (Vegetarian with High Protein)", "fact": "User is vegetarian and consumes a lot of protein" }}

with boundary checks); (2) Numeric Values ap-pearing in the query (e.g., price constraints); (3) 

Token Overlap for compound entities (length >

4), ensuring that distinctive parts of a name (e.g., "California" in "Hotel California") are not leaked; and (4) Structured Identifiers (e.g., IDs, emails) detected via substring matching. 

Solvability Discriminator. Lexical rules can-not detect semantic leakage (e.g., describing "NYC" as "the Big Apple"). To address this, we employ a Blinded LLM Discriminator . The dis-criminator is presented with the query Q and tool schema but denied access to the memory context 

M . It attempts to predict the tool arguments solely from Q. If the discriminator successfully infers the correct parameters, the query is deemed "Solv-able Without Memory" and rejected. This counter-factual evaluation guarantees that the final samples strictly require memory integration. 

C Human Verification Guidelines 

To ensure the reliability of M EM 2A CT BENCH , a rigorous human verification process was imple-mented, involving five expert annotators with ex-perience in NLP and agent-evaluation tasks. Each annotator holds advanced degrees in fields such as Computational Linguistics, Computer Science, or Artificial Intelligence, and has prior experience in evaluating AI models. The verification process was divided into three stages: fact extraction, con-flict resolution, and memory dependency verifica-tion. Annotators cross-checked each item, and dis-8185 Error Type Memory Context Generated Query ( Q) Target Param Verdict Direct Leak-age                              

> User wants to visit Seattle ."Help me book a flight to Seat-tle ."
> city="Seattle" Reject (Rule: Ex-act Match)
> Partial Leak-age
> Account ID is AX-9920 ."Check my account status, it ends in 9920 ."
> id="AX-9920" Reject (Rule: To-ken Split)
> Solvable w/o Memory
> User prefers Italian food. "Find me a place that serves
> pasta and pizza ."
> cuisine="Italian" Reject (Discrim-inator: Semantic Leak)
> Hallucination (No mention of time). "Book the ticket for tomorrow morning ."
> time="09:00" Reject (Discrim-inator: Invalid Constraint)
> Valid Instance User mentioned budget is
> $500 in Turn 1. "Find a flight that fits the bud-get I mentioned earlier ."
> price=500 Accept

Table 9: Examples of the filtering process. Direct/Partial Leakage is caught by the rule-based filter . Solv-able/Hallucination errors are caught by the LLM Discriminator. Only queries that strictly require memory resolu-tion are accepted. 

agreements were resolved through discussion to ensure accuracy and consistency. 

C.1 Stage 1 & 2: Fact Extraction and Conflict Resolution 

Annotators verify whether extracted facts are faith-ful to the dialogue and whether memory up-dates (conflicts) are resolved logically. We in-struct annotators to strictly distinguish between up-dates (which overwrite old values) and refinements 

(which coexist). Table 10 illustrates the adjudica-tion logic for edge cases. 

C.2 Stage 3: Memory Dependency Verification 

Annotators apply Information Necessity : if a com-petent agent can infer all target arguments from the query and the tool schema alone (without con-sulting long-term memory), the sample is rejected as leakage. In practice, we reject (i) direct/par-tial leakage that exposes gold values or distinctive substrings, (ii) semantic leakage where the query uniquely identifies the value and becomes solvable without memory, and (iii) unsupported constraints that are grounded in neither memory nor the local query context. Table 9 provides end-to-end filter-ing examples from the automated pipeline. 

C.3 Disagreement Resolution Strategy 

We employ a tiered strategy to resolve disagree-ments between the two initial annotators: 1. Deterministic Verification (for Facts): Dis-agreements on extracted values (e.g., dates, numbers) are resolved by a third expert checking the raw text. This is treated as an objective truth problem. 2. Strict-Recall Principle (for Dependency): 

For ambiguous reasoning cases (e.g., whether “Call Mom” implies a specific number), we apply the Strict-Recall Principle . If the tool API requires a specific value (e.g., a phone number string) that is not in the query, it is marked as MEMORY -D EPENDENT , even if the intent seems obvious. 3. Automated Leakage Check: We utilize a rule-based filter as an auxiliary judge. If a query contains exact string matches for mem-ory parameters, it is automatically flagged as 

LEAKAGE , overriding human oversight er-rors. 

D Prompt Templates 8186 Dialogue Context & Memory State Pipeline Action / Result Verdict & Rationale Case: Preference Update 

History: “I prefer aisle seats.” New Turn: “Actually, change that to win-dow.” 

Action: aisle → discarded 

Result: seat_pref: window 

VALID . Explicit user correction requires over-writing the previous state (Temporal Obsoles-cence). 

Case: Scope Distinction 

History: “Budget for hotel is $200.” New Turn: “Budget for flight is $500.” 

Action: Merge attempt 

Result: budget: $500 

INVALID . Different en-tity scopes (Hotel vs. Flight). Both facts must be retained as separate entries. 

Case: Specificity Refinement 

History: “I want Asian food.” New Turn: “Let’s go for Sushi.” 

Action: Coexist 

Result: cuisine: Asian , dish: Sushi 

VALID . The new fact re-fines the old one without contradiction. Both are useful for tool retrieval. 

Table 10: Guidelines for validating Conflict Resolution . Annotators must determine if the pipeline correctly identified whether to overwrite, merge, or keep facts based on logical consistency. 8187 Prompt for Fact Extraction 

You are an expert information extraction system specializing in processing dialogues for fact clustering. Your primary goal is to extract key factual statements, events, and plans from the provided text. Your output must be strictly a JSON array of objects. Do not include any other text, explanations , or formatting outside of the JSON array. Each object in the array must contain exactly these three keys: 1. **"attribute"**: This is the **clustering key**. It must be a **specific, normalized category label** that includes the main topic and a key entity or detail. This key is used to group similar, specific facts. * *Example 1*: For the text "Hello, I am going to travel to Japan", the `attribute ` should be ** 'Travel Planning (Japan) '**. * *Example 2*: For "I need help setting up my Azure account", the `attribute ` should be ** '

Account Setup (Azure) '**. 2. **"facts"**: This is a concise description of the specific fact, event, or statement. * *Example*: For the text "Hello, I am going to travel to Japan", the `facts ` description should be ** 'User is planning to travel to Japan '**. 3. **"source\_text"**: This is the exact dialogue snippet from the original text that supports the extracted fact. * *Example*: ** 'Hello, I am going to travel to Japan '**. Key Instructions: * **Attribute Normalization is Critical**: The `attribute ` is the most important field. Strive for consistent, specific labels. The format should generally be `Topic (Entity) ` or `Topic ( Detail) `. (e.g., `Travel Planning (Japan) `, `Account Setup (Azure) `). * **Extract Explicit Facts**: Only extract information that is explicitly stated. Do not infer or add information that is not present in the text. * **Be Concise**: The `facts ` description should be a clear, simple statement. * **Focus on Substance**: Ignore generic conversational phrases (e.g., "hello", "thank you", "how are you") and only extract substantive facts, plans, or statements. * **Multiple Facts**: There may be multiple facts. Please carefully extract all of them. * **JSON Only**: The output must be a valid JSON list and nothing else. Output example: [\{\{ "attribute": "Topic (Detail)", "facts": "A concise description of the fact.", "source_text": "The exact source text snippet." \}\} ]---Now, process the following text: {text_content} 8188 Prompt for Tool Construction 

Extract parameter values from user memory to construct a tool call. Tool Name: {tool.get( 'name ')} Tool Description: {tool.get( 'description ', '' )} Complete Parameter Schema: {json.dumps(tool_params_schema, indent=2, ensure_ascii=False)} User Memory (extract values from here): {json.dumps(memory_chain, indent=2, ensure_ascii=False)} CRITICAL REQUIREMENTS: 1. At least one parameter values MUST come from the memory above (Explicit or Inferred). 2. Match parameter types exactly (string/integer/number/boolean/array/object). 3. For nested structures (arrays of objects), follow the schema 's items/properties definitions. 4. All required parameters must be filled. 5. PREFER ORIGINAL TEXT: If a parameter can be found in memory, USE THE EXACT ORIGINAL TEXT from the memory. 6. PARAMETER SOURCES: - Memory (Explicit): Value appears verbatim in memory (e.g., "ID is 123" -> id="123"). - Memory (Inferred): Value is inferred from context (e.g., "visiting Eiffel Tower" -> city=" Paris"). - Schema (Default): Value comes from the tool schema 's default value if not found in memory. - Multi-hop: Parameters come from multiple different facts. 7. GROUNDING INFO: - For each extracted parameter, specify: * "source_text": The text in memory used for extraction (or "default value"). * "type": "explicit", "inferred", or "default". 8. SOURCE IDENTIFICATION: - Identify which specific memory items (by their 'source_id ') were necessary to derive the parameters. - List ALL source_ids that contributed to the parameters (including inferred ones). - If a parameter comes from a default value, do not include a source_id for it unless it was verified against memory. Output JSON (follow this structure): {json.dumps(example_output, indent=2, ensure_ascii=False)} 8189 Prompt for Reverse Query Generator 

You are generating a challenging, memory-dependent user query for testing an AI agent 's long-term memory capabilities. Context: - The assistant has access to various tools and can call them to complete user requests. - You are given a specific tool call that the assistant will make, along with the user 's memory context. - Your task is to generate a natural user query that would REQUIRE the assistant to call exactly this tool, but crucially, the user MUST OMIT key details that are already present in their memory/history. Tool Call (the assistant will execute this):{json.dumps(tool_call, indent=2, ensure_ascii=False)} User 's Memory Context (History/Preferences):{memory_text} Requirements for the generated query: 1. MUST BE TOOL-DEPENDENT - The query CANNOT be answered using the model 's parametric knowledge alone. - It MUST require accessing external data or performing operations. 2. STRICTLY IMPLICIT (NO PARAMETER LEAKAGE) - You MUST OMIT parameter values that are already established in the memory context. - If the memory contains the destination "Dallas", the query MUST NOT say "Dallas". It should say "my destination" or "there". - If the memory contains the date "March 13th", the query MUST NOT say "March 13th". It should say "that day" or "the date we discussed". - The query MUST be ambiguous without the memory, but clear with the memory. 3. PROVIDE DOMAIN CONTEXT (CRITICAL) - While avoiding specific parameter values, you MUST include enough semantic context (topic, category, or action nature) so the user knows WHICH memory thread is being referred to. - AVOID purely generic pronouns like "it", "that", "those numbers" without any category. - BAD: "Can you check the numbers?" (Too vague, could be anything) - GOOD: "Can you check the atmospheric numbers?" (Better, domain is clear, but specific gas is hidden) - GOOD: "How is the air quality data looking?" (Good, implies the topic without stating "Nitrous Oxide") - BAD: "Book it." (Too vague) - GOOD: "Book that flight." (Better, domain is travel) 4. REFLECT TOOL SPECIFICS (DISAMBIGUATION) - If the tool requires a specific type of identifier (e.g., SecUID vs Username), the query should imply that specific type without stating the value. - Example: If the tool uses 'SecUID ', the query should say "using the secure ID I gave you" rather than just "my account". - This ensures the query logically leads to the specific tool selected. 5. NATURAL AND CONVERSATIONAL - Use phrases like "as usual", "like I said before", "for my trip", "book it", "check that thing ". - Make it sound like a continuing conversation or a user with a long history. 6. NO SYSTEM INTERNALS - Do NOT mention "tool", "function", "API", "call", "parameter". Output Format: Return ONLY a valid JSON object with one field: {{ "query": "the generated user query here" }} Do not include any explanations, comments, or text outside this JSON object. 8190