Title: 2026.acl-long.1669.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.1669.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:28:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 36074–36089 July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics PersonalAlign: Hierarchical Implicit Intent Alignment for Personalized GUI Agent with Long-Term User-Centric Records 

Yibo Lyu 1, Gongwei Chen 1, Rui Shao 1,2† , Weili Guan 1, Liqiang Nie 1†  

> 1

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Shenzhen Loop Area Institute weberlv1b@gmail.com {shaorui, nieliqiang}@hit.edu.com 

https://github.com/iLearn-Lab/ACL26-PersonalAlign 

Abstract 

While GUI agents have shown strong perfor-mance under explicit and completion instruc-tions, real-world deployment requires aligning with users’ more complex implicit intents. In this work, we highlight Hierarchical Implicit Intent Alignment for Personalized GUI Agent (PersonalAlign ), a new agent task that requires agents to leverage long-term user records as per-sistent context to resolve omitted preferences in vague instructions and anticipate latent rou-tines by user state for proactive assistance. To facilitate this study, we introduce AndroidIn-tent , a benchmark designed to evaluate agents’ ability in resolving vague instructions and pro-viding proactive suggestions through reasoning over long-term user records. We annotated 775 user-specific preferences and 215 routines from 20k long-term records across different users for evaluation. Furthermore, we introduce Hier-archical Intent Memory Agent ( HIM-Agent ), which maintains a continuously updating per-sonal memory and hierarchically organizes user preferences and routines for personalization. Finally, we evaluate a range of GUI agents on AndroidIntent, including GPT-5, Qwen3-VL, and UI-TARS, further results show that HIM-Agent significantly improves both execution and proactive performance by 15.7% and 7.3%. 

1 Introduction 

With the rapid advancement of multimodal large language models (MLLM) (Bai et al., 2025b; An et al., 2025), GUI agents have made significant progress in grounding natural language instructions into executable actions (Wang et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025a). However, most existing works are evaluated in simulated environ-ments and rely on the strong assumption of com-plete user instructions. We argue that instructions often fail to fully capture user’s true intent in daily  

> †

Corresponding authors. Inst:  Please order  a single meal  from  the nearest               

> McDonald's on Meituan .
> Moment Intent
> Preference Intent
> Routine Intent
> Inst: Please o rder
> McDonald's for me.
> Preference Thinking:
> User prefe rordering the nearest McDonald's single meal on Meituan .
> First, open Meituan...
> First, open Meituan...
> Second, select nearest...
> Third, select single mean...
> Proactive Thinking:
> User always ordering ... in home
> around 12 a.m .
> Do you need me to help you order...
> State: 12:00 a.m.
> Home
> Implicit Intent
> Personal Alignment
> User Record
> User Record

Reactive Execution 

PersonalAlign 

Figure 1: We highlight a new PersonalAlign agent task. Agent should leverage the user’s long-term record to provide hierarchical implicit intent alignment for both preference and routine intent. 

usage, motivating the need for personalized agents capable of perceiving intent beyond the traditional instruction-following reactive paradigm. From a user-centric perspective, human–agent in-teraction constitutes a joint activity where meaning is co-constructed through shared context (Clark, 1996). In daily usage, this shared context leads users to naturally omit recurring patterns, assum-ing the agent can "fill in the blanks" from historical records (Cheng et al., 2025b; Qian et al., 2024), leading to the emergence of implicit intent . As shown in Figure 1, user intent exhibits hierarchical degrees of implicitness. While reactive agents pri-marily handle explicit instructions, a personalized agent should extend to align user’s implicit intent by leveraging long-term user records as context: ad-dressing preference intent in vague instructions 

where preference details are omitted, and further anticipating routine intent without instruction 

only based on current user state. Bridging implicit 

36074 Table 1: Comparison of the AndroidIntent with existing GUI benchmark or dataset. We also show that whether each trait is fully incorporated ( ✓), partially incorporated ( ✓), or not incorporated ( ✗).    

> Benchmark or Dataset vague Instruction Proactive Suggestion Long-term Records User-Centric Annotation User Modeling Task Target
> AITW (Rawles et al., 2023)

# ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ GUI Execution AndroidControl(Li et al., 2024a) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ GUI Execution SPA-Bench(Chen et al., 2025b) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ GUI Execution ProactiveAgent(Lu et al., 2025b) ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ Proactive Agent OS-Karois(Cheng et al., 2025a) ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ Human Cooperation IFRAgent(Wu et al., 2025) ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ Personalized Execution FingerTip(Yang et al., 2025b) ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ Behavior Prediction AndroidIntent ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Intent Alignment 

intent gaps is essential for effective joint activity and for establishing stronger human–agent trust. To address this practical dilemma, we highlight Hierarchical Implicit Intent Alignment for Person-alized GUI Agent ( PersonalAlign ). This task shifts focus from simple execution to align with user’s implicit intent. Specifically, PersonalAlign requires agent to identify preferences from past repeated selections to resolve vague instructions, while separating more frequent and state-consistent routines to facilitate proactive assistance. This en-ables agents to transition from independent reactive executors into personalized partners that co-evolve through personal interaction. To achieve Person-alAlign, current research faces two limitations: 

1. Lack of long-term, user-centric annotated benchmarks. Most existing datasets primarily fo-cus on static, simulated completion instruction exe-cution, failing to evaluate personalized agent. To bridge this gap, we introduce AndroidIntent , a novel benchmark constructed from personal daily records. We explicitly annotate user preferences and routines from long-term records, and simulate implicit intent by carefully removing recoverable personal preferences from original intents. To miti-gate subjectivity and conceptual ambiguity during the annotation process, we introduce a hierarchical filtering-verifying strategy. This approach trans-lates abstract personalization concepts into quan-tifiable scores, allowing us to efficiently identify candidates for human verification. As detailed in Table 1, AndroidIntent evaluates GUI agent’s abil-ity to align implicit intent by leveraging long-term user records as context for user modeling. 

2. Inability to manage long-term user records. 

Existing agent memory for LLM-chat often rely solely on semantic similarity, which is insufficient for handling GUI execution. Moreover, such mem-ory fail to support hierarchical intent alignment. To address these limitations, we propose a specially designed agent memory, Hierarchical Intent Mem-ory Agent ( HIM-Agent ). HIM-Agent incorporates a Streaming Aggregation Module to enable incre-mental updates of user behavior. Building upon this foundation, the Execution-based Preference Filter and the State-based Routine Filter extract Prefer-ence Intent Memory and Routine Intent Memory, forming a hierarchical intent alignment support. In the experiment, we observe that vague instruc-tions typically convey coarse-grained sub-goals, causing fine-grained execution failures when spe-cific personal requirements are absent at certain steps, and that most current GUI agents fail to de-liver reliable proactive suggestions, calling for per-sonal agents’ stronger context analysis capabilities. Our contribution can be summarized as: • We introduce a new agent task PersonalAlign ,which requires agent to align with user’s im-plicit intents through long-term record. • We construct a new GUI bench AndroidIn-tent , which annotates daily preference and routine intent from long-term records. • We propose a new agent memory HIM-Agent ,which hierarchically learns preference and routine intent from long-term records. • We conduct extensive experiments and anal-ysis across various GUI Agents and demon-strate superior performance of HIM-Agent. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Personalized GUI Agent 

Agents assist users in operating mobile devices or interacting with the real world through natural-language instructions (Zhu et al., 2026a; Li et al., 36075 2025; Chen et al., 2025a; Zhu et al., 2026b). While many datasets and methods concentrate on evaluat-ing execution success rate (Rawles et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2025a; Xie et al., 2024), a more in-telligent personal GUI assistant should infer and match user’s true intent. Some prior work focuses on learning from human action for personaliza-tion. For example, IFRAgent (Wu et al., 2025) extracts both explicit and implicit intention flows from short-term instruction traces. FingerTip (Yang et al., 2025b) uses recent historical actions to per-sonalize current execution. On the other hand, some research emphasizes proactive suggestions for personalization. ProactiveAgent (Lu et al., 2025b) trains agents to monitor the environment and user activities to enable proactive behaviors; ContextAgent (Yang et al., 2025a) leverages real-world sensors to infer users’ current states; and Galaxy (Bao et al., 2025) introduces the Cognition Forest framework for proactive services. However, existing methods rarely address daily, user-centric personalization; preference execution and proac-tive suggestion have largely evolved as isolated paradigms. In this work, we bridge this gap by introducing a hierarchical view of user’s implicit intent, thereby unifying these two tasks into a coher-ent and unified, user-centric personalization frame-work for GUI agents. 

2.2 Agent Memory 

Memory is essential for agents to persist user long-term agent interactions (Bao et al., 2025; Li et al., 2024b; Long et al., 2025), which is critical for building an intelligent personal GUI agent. MemA-gent (Yu et al., 2025) and Mem1 (Zhou et al., 2025) propose progressively compressing dialogues to ex-tend context length, while Memory-R1 (Yan et al., 2025) introduces an RL framework to train agents in organizing and utilizing memory. Mirage-1 (Xie et al., 2025) constructs an Execution Skill Memory to enhance GUI agent performance. For user profil-ing and memory construction, Memory OS (Kang et al., 2025) aggregates user dialogues into seg-ments and applies memory into short-, mid-, and long-term modules for retrieval. LettinGo (Wang et al., 2025b) uses LLM to generate diverse and adaptive user profiles. PersonaX (Shi et al., 2025) clusters historical records for user profile modeling. To address PersonalAlign, agent memory should not only generalize over long-term user records but also hierarchically organize user intents. 

3 PersonalAlign Task Definition 

For each user’s long-term record, we organize the data chronologically and use the first 80% record as historical record H = {R1, R 2 . . . R m}, while the remaining 20% record serves as the executing record E = {Rm+1 . . . R n} for annotation and in-ference. Each GUI interaction record Ri consists of the following elements: instruction I, interaction time T , interaction scenario S, execution action trajectory A = [ τ1, τ 2, . . . , τ n] and screen observa-tion O = [ o1, o 2, . . . , o n], formally represented as: 

Ri = {(Ii, T i, S i, A i, O i)}Ni .At the most fundamental level, when the user provides a complete and explicit instruction It,the agent operates under reactive GUI execution paradigm. In this setting, the agent executes a se-quence of actions τt to fulfill the instruction, lack-ing the capability to leverage long-term historical records and perform personalization. Beyond the reactive level, user’s daily instruc-tions may lack explicit preference information. In these cases, a personalized agent should infer the missing preferences based on user’s histori-cal record H. Given a vague instruction ˆIt, agent should infer user’s intent from the historical intent and action sequences, ensuring each step selection satisfies the user’s intent. At a higher level, user may exhibit latent rou-tines, requiring agents to incorporate current user state to provide proactive suggestions. By leverag-ing repetitive intents in historical records H under similar states, agents can proactively generate sug-gestions I′

> t

, even without user instructions, denoted as I∅. We formalize these three paradigms as:             

> 
> At←fθ(It; ( {} )∈ H )
> At←fθ( ˆIt; ( {Ii, A i})∈ H )
> I′
> t←fθ(I∅; ( {Ii, T i, S i})∈ H ),
> (1)

where the three formulations correspond to Reac-tive, Preference, and Routine Intent alignment, re-spectively. The left side represents user inputs, while the right side denotes the historical interac-tion records H that the agent leverages. For Per-sonalAlign, we primarily focus on the latter two settings, where the agent should learn to apply the user’s long-term records as context to provide hi-erarchical personalized services to improve user trust and satisfaction in daily use. More discus-sions on diverse forms of personalized agents and their settings are provided in Appendix C. 36076 Daily 

> Record

AndroidIntent 

Collection 

Pipeline   

> Long-term Record
> Raw Data
> Drop
> Human Verifying
> Select
> Hierarchical Filtering
> Sample
> Moment Preference
> Candidate
> 80% Historical
> Record
> 20% Executing
> Record

... 

...  ...  

> Quantifying
> Density
> Score
> Top-k Similar
> Assistant
> Routine
> Candidate

Figure 2: Overview of AndroidIntent collection pipeline. We employ a two-stage filtering-verification, integrating objective criteria with subjective judgment to hierarchi-cally annotate user intent from long-horizon records. 

4 AndroidIntent 

To evaluate PersonalAlign, we need to annotate the ground truth from continuous user records, specif-ically identifying user preference and routine in-tents that are sufficiently supported by historical ev-idence to enable reliable personalization. To bridge this gap, we present AndroidIntent, built upon 91 users’ 2 months of Android interaction records from Fingertip20K (Yang et al., 2025b). However, directly annotating such 20k long-horizon user his-tories introduces significant challenges: the defi-nition of preference and routine is ambiguous and lacks objective standards. To alleviate these issues and ensure annotation quality, we introduce a new hierarchical filtering-verifying strategy. As shown in Figure 2, we illustrate the annotation pipeline. 

4.1 Hierarchical Filtering Strategy Analysis Strategy. Developing personalized agents should first validate stable, modelable per-sonal patterns to establish an existence proof and statistical bounds. We conceptually distinguish one-off moment intents from recurring preferences and routines based on their occurrence patterns within H, where higher frequency and consistency indicate stable preferences to routines. To trans-late these concepts into a practical filtering and 

Figure 3: Visualization of the user’s intents distribution by aggregating all executing records across users. At a sufficient scale, the intent statistics exhibit three approx-imately Gaussian-like distributions. 

validation strategy, we tend to adopt a simple and robust approach that avoids inductive bias and over-pruning. Consequently, we focus on simple and well-established measures of intent semantic simi-larity and user state distribution. 

Intent Semantic Similarity. In analyzing semantic similarity, we employ Qwen3-Embedding (Zhang et al., 2025) as our embedding model to measure the semantic similarity between H and E. For record Re ∈ E, we compute its similarity with all intents in the historical record H. Specifically, to prioritize intents with high recurrence, we fo-cus on the density of similar historical instances rather than isolated occurrences. We retain the top-k most similar records Hk and compute their average similarity score. As a result, intents that are both semantically closer and more frequent in history receive higher scores.    

> Scos (Re) = 1
> k
> ∑
> Hk
> cos (emb (Ie),emb (Ik)),(2)

where Ie ∈ Re, Ik ∈ H k, emb (·) denotes the em-bedding function, and cos (·) represents the cosine similarity between two embeddings. 

User State Offset. In analyzing user state, time T

and scenario S serve as key components. We quan-tify their distribution by analyzing the offsets of Hk

relative to Re to determine whether similar interac-tions have been frequently executed under similar states. Temporal offset entropy ∆Ht is computed as the normalized entropy over hour-level temporal offsets between Hk and Re, reflecting the degree of temporal consistency. Scenario offset entropy ∆Hs

is defined as the normalized entropy over scenario category offsets between Hk and Re, indicating whether intents are scenario-specific. This can be formulated as: 36077 (c) 

(d) 

(a)  (b)          

> Open NetEase Cloud Music
> Daily Recommendations
> and play the first song.
> Play r ecommendation songs.
> Ambiguous Instruction ：
> Original Intent ：Open Sohu News, check out
> trending topics, browse
> articles, and like them.
> User Intent ：
> Time ：22:00 - 23:00
> Scenario ：Home
> Open DingTalk to clock in for
> work.
> Original Interaction ：
> Time ：8:00 - 9:00
> Scenario ：School
> Open KFC app, select in-store
> pickup, paid membership and
> choose meal includes milk.
> Pick up breakfast In-Store.
> Ambiguous Instruction ：
> Original Intent ：

Figure 4: Statistics of AndroidIntent. (a) and (b) show the data distributions for preference and proactive behaviors, respectively; (c) presents the distribution of user instruction types; and (d) illustrates the information volume distribution of vague instructions. 



∆Ht(Re) = − ∑ p(∆ h) log 2 p(∆ h)log 2 hour 

∆Hs(Re) = − ∑ p(∆ s) log 2 p(∆ s)log 2 scene ,

(3) 

where ∆h and ∆s means the offsets of each Hk

to Re, and hour, scene means the total hours and scenarios for normalization. Lower entropy val-ues indicate more stable user states in historical interaction, which are more suitable for proactive. 

Quantifying and Filtering. Finally, following Eq. 4, we compute the quantified score Qscore for each executing record in E across all users. As shown in Figure 3, the resulting distributions over large-scale user data exhibit three hierarchical ap-proximately Gaussian modes, which naturally cor-respond to moment, preference, and routine intents, showing the existence of modelable patterns for personalized agent at a global mining view. This distributional structure enables a fast filtering of large-scale data to identify preference and routine candidates, improving both the objectivity and scal-ability of the annotation. 

Qscore (Re) = Scos + ∆ Ht + ∆ Hs (4) 

4.2 Human Verifying Strategy 

To ensure the final dataset remains unbiased by the filtering process and strictly aligns with human feelings, we perform Human Verifying after filter-ing. Following quantification, we slightly expand the sampling range of the Gaussian distribution to retain a broader set of samples in overlapping regions, further mitigating potential overfitting to specific filtering rules. During annotation, annota-tors further compare each preference and routine candidate with the user’s historical records H to re-verify and re-annotate the intent types. To support the construction of vague preference instructions, we additionally use GPT to generate a diverse set of alternative instructions that deliberately omit po-tential user preferences. Annotators then select the instruction that best matches the user’s likely in-tent as the final vague instruction. All candidates undergo multiple rounds of cross-validation by in-dependent annotators to ensure data quality. 

4.3 AndroidIntent Statistic 

As shown in Figure 4, we present the over-all distribution of AndroidIntent. (a) This sub-set contains 775 annotated user interactions and 

7,915 GUI actions within 130 different daily apps, with entertainment-related activities accounting for roughly one-third of the data and shopping behav-iors comprising 12.2%. reflecting users’ prefer-ences for browsing videos across multiple plat-forms or purchasing goods on their preferred plat-forms. (b) This subset includes 215 annotated user interactions within 60 different daily apps, among which 14.6% correspond to sign-in oper-ations. Other proactive intent, such as alarm set-ting, weather checking, and workout tracking, each account for approximately 9% and exhibit strong temporal and semantic consistency. (c) The fig-ure illustrates the distribution of interaction types per user. Moment intents dominate for most users, while each user exhibits, on average, around 10 preference interactions and 3–5 routine interactions. Notably, some users show no clearly identifiable routines. (d) We compare the lexical entropy of original and vague instructions using a word-level 36078 Table 2: Compare the scale and diversity of AndroidIn-tent with other recent GUI benchmarks.               

> Benchmark Episode Apps History Records
> AndroidWorld 116 20 -SPA-bench 340 58 -IFRAgent 630 16 9users/7days/15records
> Ours 775+215 190 91users/60days/200records

metric. The results show a clear reduction in en-tropy, indicating that vague instructions tend to be more concise and linguistically simplified. As shown in the Table 2, AndroidIntent achieves a competitive scale and substantially improved di-versity compared to recent GUI benchmarks. It contains 775+215 episodes spanning 190 applica-tions, significantly exceeding prior datasets in both task coverage and application breadth. In addition, the collected 91 users over 60 days with 200 inter-action records provide richer user-centric signals, which are typically limited in user coverage and temporal depth. Overall, these characteristics en-able AndroidIntent to support more comprehensive evaluation of user preferences and behavioral rou-tines in realistic GUI interaction scenarios. Currently, AndroidIntent focuses on Android en-vironments and provides a benchmark for mobile GUI interaction. However, our data filtering and annotation pipeline is applicable across platforms and languages, as it only relies on general GUI interaction primitives such as action trajectories, user interaction states, and user interaction intents. These characteristics are shared across different environments (e.g., web and desktop operating sys-tems), where interactions and user states can be consistently recorded, analyzed, and filtered. As a result, our methodology can be naturally extended to other GUI settings with minimal adaptation. We believe that exploring approaches that can both pre-serve user privacy and enable scalable collection of user-centric GUI interaction data is a key direction for improving personalized agents. 

5 HIM-Agent 

To support PersonalAlign, agent memory should generalize stable representations to exclude one-off moments while separating preferences and routines, and continuously evolve to stay aligned with user intents. As shown in Figure 5, we introduce HIM-Agent, a foundational and inspirational personal agent memory that enables GUI agents to rapidly leverage long-term records as context for personal-ization without interfering with original execution. We construct a streaming update memory and hier-archically organize memory prototypes into Pref-erence Intent Memory and Routine Intent Memory through the execution-based and state-based filter to enable hierarchical intent alignment. 

5.1 Streaming Aggregation Module 

Raw low-level GUI interaction records are inher-ently fragmented and noisy. Trivial operating based on these raw record leads to long-tail effects and memory drift, making it difficult to maintain sta-ble personalized representations over time. To ad-dress this challenge, we propose Streaming Aggre-gation Module that reframes personalization mem-ory from a static log-based storage to a continually evolving representation. Rather than operating in individual records, we maintain Record Prototypes 

Pi as the fundamental memory units that synthesize similar records into a cohesive whole:     

> Pi={Rh|S consist (Rh, P i)> θ },(5)

where Rh ∈ H represents incoming historical records, Sconsist measures the consistency between records and prototypes. Based on MicroCluster in stream mining (Aggarwal et al., 2003), our mod-ule incrementally aggregates records at a daily-granularity, enabling an evolving personal memory. 

5.2 Execution-based Preference Filter 

GUI agent memory differs from chat-based mem-ory in that each user interaction includes an execu-tion trajectory rather than purely semantic content. In the Execution-based Filter, we compute Sconsist 

by jointly modeling semantic intent similarity and action trajectory consistency for more comprehen-sive aggregation for GUI interaction. For semantic similarity Ssim , we combine dense embedding cosine similarity Scos with sparse Jac-card SJac , which computes the overlap ratio of shared words between instructions, to robustly mea-sure semantic similarity. Since GUI instructions are often short and entity-heavy (e.g., app names, items), this may lead to distortions in Scos .For action consistency Saction , we employ Dy-namic Time Warping (DTW) to measure the simi-larity between trajectories that have temporal struc-ture. DTW computes an optimal alignment path 

π by minimizing the cumulative distance between aligned action steps. The execution-based prefer-36079 MLLM  Backbone            

> Intent: Open EmailA to...
> Time: 9:05
> Scenario: Company
> Trajectory: {action: ...}
> Daily Interaction
> Routine Intent
> Memory
> Preference Intent
> Memory
> Record
> State-based Routine Filter
> Execution-based Preference Filter
> Open EmailA to check ..
> Open EmailA to
> send ...
> Click...
> Type...
> Wait...
> ...
> Click...
> Wait...
> Click...
> ...
> Time
> 910 21 Company Home
> Scenario

HIM-Agent  Personal Memory       

> Mobile
> Env.
> Streaming
> Aggregation Module
> Daily Update
> Center Center
> Record
> Prototype Record
> Prototype
> Semantic Action
> User Interaction
> Now is 9:12 at
> compny ,Do you need Open EmailA to check emails?
> Vague Inst:
> Send the email.
> User often open EmailA to send
> messages to...
> {'open EmailA'}
> User
> Agent
> Agent
> User

...  

> User State:
> 9:12 Company
> Routine Intent
> Preference Intent

Figure 5: Overview of HIM-Agent. The Streaming Aggregation Module updates user records daily, and the aggregated prototypes are hierarchically organized to support personalized preference and routine intent. 

ence filter can be formulated as: 



Ssim (Ih, I ci ) = Scos + SJac 

Saction (Ah, A ci ) = min 

> π

∑ 

> (i,j )∈π

d(ai, b j )

Sconsist (Rh, P i) = Ssim + Saction ,

(6) 

where Ih, A h denote the intent and action of Rh,while Ici , A ci represent center intent and action of prototype Pi, which are updated daily by selecting the instructions and actions with the minimum av-erage distance to all other records assigned to Pi.The pairwise distance d(ai, b j ) is computed based on the GUI action success rate (SR) (Rawles et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2025a), which evaluates whether two actions are the same action. After filtering, each Record Prototype Pi pro-vides a stable representation and is stored in Prefer-ence Intent Memory. When HIM-Agent needs to in-fer user preferences, the corresponding prototype’s center intent Ic and action Ac will be provided. 

5.3 State-based Routine Filter 

Upon the formation of a stable prototype Pi, we introduce State-based Routine Filter to further sep-arate passive preferences from proactive intents. This module jointly considers the frequency of oc-currence, the execution coherence, and the con-sistency of user states of each Pi to determine whether proactive suggestions should be activated. To achieve this, we define a proactive confidence 

Φ( Pi), which is calculated by: the state stability 

Table 3: Impact of instruction-induced degradation on GUI agents. Various agents are evaluated under both complete and vague instructions, with results under vague instructions shown in the gray line. 

Model Type SSR CSR ↑

Closed-sourced GUI Agents 

GPT-5.1 51.2 26.4 52.3 49.3 ↓3.7% 20.3 ↓23.1% 22.9 ↓56.2% 

GLM-4.5v 51.0 27.4 54.5 50.5 ↓0.9% 19.4 ↓25.5% 22.6 ↓58.5% 

QwenVL-Max 51.9 29.8 53.3 51.6 ↓0.5% 24.8 ↓16.9% 27.3 ↓48.8% 

Open-sourced GUI Agents 

UI-TARS-1.5 49.4 23.5 38.6 46.8 ↓2.6% 19.9 ↓15.3% 14.9 ↓23.7% 

GUI-Owl 54.2 24.9 50.4 53.1 ↓2.0% 17.9 ↓28.1% 23.7 ↓53.0% 

Qwen3-VL 52.7 26.7 52.9 46.6 ↓12.0% 20.6 ↓22.8% 26.6 ↓49.7% 

Hstate , which captures the normalized of tempo-ral and scenario entropies within records of pro-totype; the record length in prototype Lrecord , re-flecting how frequently the pattern recurs; and the aggregation weight Rconsist , obtained by averag-ing Sconsist . Confidence is jointly inferred based on state consistency, execution consistency, and frequency. This is formulated as: 

Φ( Pi) = Hstate + Lrecord + Rconsist , (7) 

If Φ( Pi) exceeds the proactive confidence bound-ary, the corresponding prototype is stored in Rou-tine Intent Memory. When the HIM-Agent needs to determine whether proactive suggestions are re-quired, prototype’s center intent Ic and the most frequent state Tc, S c will be provided. 

6 Experiment 

6.1 Experimental Setup Metrics. We evaluate GUI execution using Type Accuracy (Type) and Step-wise Success Rate 

(SSR) under an offline evaluation protocol, where treated user actions are the golden trajectory. More-over, we introduce a new Cumulative Successful Rate (CSR) to measure failures on critical steps caused by vague instructions, where missing user-specific information leads to mismatches with the user’s true intent. To approximate the impact of er-rors on critical steps, we assign a decaying weight to each step along the trajectory, such that earlier errors contribute more heavily to the overall score. CSR thus serves as an intermediate metric that bridges offline evaluation with online performance. 36080 Table 4: GUI agent performance in proactive service. Lower False-Alarm rates indicate better proactive accuracy. Values marked in red denote cases of insufficient capability by the agent.                                             

> Model Intent Alignment Identification Alignment Semantic Judgment Precision Recall False-Alarm ↓F1-score
> Closed-sourced GUI Agents
> GPT-5.1 49.4% 32.0% 73.1% 78.6% 62.0% 75.8% GLM-4.5V 52.8% 33.9% 68.9% 96.7% 94.0% 80.4%
> QwenVL-Max 52.2% 34.8% 67.4% 97.2% 98.0% 67.4%
> Open-sourced GUI Agents
> UI-TARS-1.5 42.6% 19.0% 68.7% 99.1% 97.0% 81.1%
> GUI-Owl 32.6% 12.2% 79.9% 57.2% 31.0% 66.7% Qwen3-VL 45.0% 23.6% 69.0% 97.2% 94.0% 80.7%

Table 5: Execution performance across various methods under vague instructions. † denotes the baseline.                  

> Base †
> Model Retrieve-based Generalized-based Recent Retrieve LLM-UM HIM-Agent
> Type 46.6 49.4 51.0 51.2 52.0
> SSR 20.6 21.1 22.4 22.3 24.0
> CSR ↑26.6 33.2 35.4 35.2 42.3

Table 6: Proactive performance comparison. FA means False-Alarm rate. † denotes the baseline.                                  

> Retrieve-based Generalized-based Recent †Retrieve LLM-UM HIM-Agent
> Semantic 49.4% 49.8% 49.1% 53.5%
> Judgement 32.0% 32.2% 31.6% 36.3%
> Precision 70.8% 74.2% 75.6% 78.1%
> Recall 78.3% 82.0% 82.3% 81.4% FA ↓62.0% 64.0% 57.0% 49.0%
> F1-score 75.8% 77.9% 78.8% 79.7%
> Token 4930 3089 1161(+6518) 1605

On the other hand, to evaluate the agent’s proac-tive recommendation capability, we consider In-tent Alignment and Identification Alignment (Lu et al., 2025b). We measure the Semantic similarity between generated suggestions and user’s origi-nal intent using embedding cosine similarity and edit distance. We also use an LLM-as-Judgment 

to evaluate intent alignment, where DeepSeek-V3 is employed to mitigate self-bias. Identification Alignment evaluates proactive appropriateness, we carefully collect 100 negative user states that do not require proactive assistance, and compute Pre-cision , Recall , False-Alarm , and F1-score .Please also refer to Appendix A for more details about baselines and implementation details. 

6.2 Experimental Analysis Vague Instruction Impact on GUI Execution. 

Table 3 shows the impact of vague instructions on several outstanding open- and closed-sourced GUI agents. Currently, GUI agents still need to im-prove their performance across daily instructions 

Table 7: Ablation study of components in Execution-based Preference Filter Module. Dense and Sparse de-note embedding and Jaccard similarity.                                

> Components Performance Dense Sparse Action Type SSR CSR ↑×××49.4 21.1 33.2
> ×✓✓50.8 22.5 35.9
> ✓×✓51.1 22.9 36.3
> ✓✓×51.4 23.3 37.3
> ✓✓✓52.0 24.0 42.3

Figure 6: Ablation study of components for proactive performance. Lower of False-Alarm means better align. 

and apps since most SSR is around 25-30. Notably, while ambiguity leads to only a 3% drop in type accuracy, SSR and CSR decrease by approximately 20% and 45%. We observe that vague instructions act as coarse-grained sub-goals : although agents can often identify the high-level intended opera-tion, execution fails at a fine-grained level due to the absence of critical personalized preference in-formation. For example, lacking explicit require-ments, the agent may open incorrect apps, causing execution to deviate significantly from user intent. 

Challenge in Balancing Proactive Identifica-tion. Table 4 evaluates the proactive performance of GUI agents based on recent historical records and current user state. Notably, most models struggle to determine when proactive behavior is truly necessary. Aside from GPT-5.1, current GUI agents generally fail to provide effective proac-tive suggestions , as they struggle to balance false 36081 Time:  20: 26                 

> Scenario: Home
> Open Sports Health APP and view today's sports data.
> {open:'browser '} {type:'baked rice '} {'finished' }
> User State States: 20: 40,Home,
> 19: 58,Home,
> 20: 10,Home
> Historical Record
> Preference Intent Routine Intent
> Reactive Agent
> <History_Record>
> <Think> User often purchase on meituan.</Think>
> {open: 'meituan'}
> {scroll: 'down'} {'finished'} {click: '186,296'}
> Proactive Suggest
> User HIM-Agent
> Original Intent
> Search for L. cheese baked rice on Meituan and browse the types of cheese baked rice at the first store.
> <History_Record>
> <Think>User often select the first baked
> rice store.</Think>
> {click:'717,1709'}
> <History_Record>
> <Think>User often
> order L. baked rice. </Think>
> {type:' L. Baked rice'}
> Reactive Agent
> No instuction,
> no action.
> HIM-Agent
> Browse the types of cheese baked rice.
> Vague Instruction
> Intent: View today's
> sports data.
> ...

Figure 7: Case study of HIM-Agent. Left : HIM-Agent resolves vague instructions by aligning intent with historical interaction records. Right : HIM-Agent proactively suggests based on historical record and user state. 

alarms and recall, often defaulting to overly proac-tive. These failure cases are highlighted in red and underlined. This reveals a promising research direction: to effectively leverage user records for personalization, agents must develop superior long-term context analysis capabilities. 

HIM-Agent significantly enhances agent’s ability to align implicit intent. Since Person-alAlign is a novel paradigm without established methods, we select and compare it against two representative categories of basic approaches: (i) top-down retrieval-based methods, which incorpo-rate recent or relevant historical records as user context for the agent, and (ii) bottom-up inductive methods, which leverage LLMs to summarize user profiles (LLM-UM) (Wang et al., 2025b), alongside our HIM-Agent. As shown in Table 5, we build HIM-Agent based on outstanding open-sourced Qwen3-VL. HIM-Agent achieves the best perfor-mance in alleviating the impact of vague instruc-tions, obtaining a CSR score of 42.3. Furthermore, to objectively evaluate different methods’ proactive capability, we conduct experiments on GPT-5.1, which only shows basic balanced proactive abil-ity. As shown in Table 6, our framework achieves superior performance in both Semantic Alignment and Identification Alignment. HIM-Agent helps the agent achieve a better balance between recall 81.4% and false-alarm 49% and keep the highest Intent Alignment score 53.3% and 36.3%. While LLM-UM introduces extra 6518 tokens consumed when generating user profiles, HIM-Agent remains highly efficient during generalized user modeling. 

Ablation Study. Table 7 presents the ablation study of components within Execution-based Pref-erence Filter. The first gray line denotes the setting without this filter, under which the streaming ag-gregation module also can’t work, and memory de-generates to individual records without prototypes. The results indicate that all three components con-tribute to performance gains, and the full module achieves a 9.1% improvement in CSR. As shown in Figure 6, we further demonstrate the importance of state-related components in enabling proactive, where both time and scenario play crucial roles. Notably, removing the filter while retaining all pro-totypes will cause an increase in false alarms to nearly 70%, which is even higher than the base-line with recent individual records, highlighting the critical role of the state filter for proactive. 

6.3 Case Study 

As shown in Figure 7, we present case studies com-paring HIM-Agent and a reactive agent. In daily us-age, user instructions often omit preferences, lead-ing reactive GUI agents to misalign with the user’s true intent. HIM-Agent can infer missing prefer-ences from historical records to correct action exe-cution. By jointly reasoning over records and the current state, HIM-Agent can also proactively as-sist users, whereas reactive agents remain inactive without explicit instructions. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduce a new critical challenge for agents, PersonalAlign, which requires hierarchical person-alization to resolve implicit intents in daily in-teractions. We introduce AndroidIntent, a new user-centric GUI benchmark curated with a filter-verify strategy, and propose HIM-Agent, a memory framework that enables hierarchical personaliza-tion based on long-term user records. Experiments on AndroidIntent show some new challenge and the effectiveness of the HIM-Agent. 36082 Limitations 

While AndroidIntent and HIM-Agent evaluate how user implicit intent influences GUI agents, several limitations remain. First, the availability of suit-able datasets remains limited. Due to the lack of large-scale, publicly available datasets that capture long-term user interaction records, our evaluation is currently restricted to the Fingertip. Our anno-tation strategy and method cannot yet be broadly validated across diverse real-world datasets. Future work could extend data collection to other GUI en-vironments, such as operating systems and desktop applications. Second, our method may suffer from a cold-start issue, where insufficient historical inter-action data limits the agent’s ability to accurately infer user intent and provide proactive suggestions. Addressing these challenges remains an important and promising direction for future research. 

Ethical considerations 

Since modeling user intent relies on historical in-teraction data, collecting and utilizing such data may raise privacy potential risks. In our work, we build upon the Fingertip dataset and do not in-troduce any additional personal information. In the original dataset, all participants were clearly informed about the intended use of the collected data and provided explicit consent by signing a data usage agreement. They were also instructed not to upload any private or sensitive information. We emphasize that privacy considerations should be treated as a fundamental aspect when develop-ing personalized agents. Future research should explore privacy-preserving solutions, such as on-device deployment, federated learning, or simu-lated user agents, to ensure that user data remains secure while enabling effective personalization. 

Acknowledgements 

This study is supported by Guangdong S&TProgramme (Grant No. 2025B0101130003), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62306090), Natural Science Foun-dation of Guangdong Province of China (Grant No. 2024A1515010147), Natural Science Foundation of Shenzhen City of China (Grant No. JCYJ20250604145700001), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (L254018) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U24A20328). 

References 

Charu C Aggarwal, S Yu Philip, Jiawei Han, and Jiany-ong Wang. 2003. A framework for clustering evolv-ing data streams. In Proceedings 2003 VLDB confer-ence , pages 81–92. Elsevier. Xiang An, Yin Xie, Kaicheng Yang, Wenkang Zhang, Xiuwei Zhao, Zheng Cheng, Yirui Wang, Songcen Xu, Changrui Chen, Chunsheng Wu, and 1 others. 2025. Llava-onevision-1.5: Fully open framework for democratized multimodal training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23661 .Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, Wenbin Ge, Zhi-fang Guo, Qidong Huang, Jie Huang, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Shutong Jiang, Zhaohai Li, Mingsheng Li, and 45 others. 2025a. Qwen3-vl technical report. 

Preprint , arXiv:2511.21631. Shuai Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin Wang, Wen-bin Ge, Sibo Song, Kai Dang, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Jun Tang, and 1 others. 2025b. Qwen2. 5-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923 .Chongyu Bao, Ruimin Dai, Yangbo Shen, Runyang Jian, Jinghan Zhang, Xiaolan Liu, and Kunpeng Liu. 2025. Galaxy: A cognition-centered framework for proactive, privacy-preserving, and self-evolving llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03991 .Gongwei Chen, Xurui Zhou, Rui Shao, Yibo Lyu, Kai-wen Zhou, Shuai Wang, Wentao Li, Yinchuan Li, Zhongang Qi, and Liqiang Nie. 2025a. Less is more: Empowering gui agent with context-aware simplifica-tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision .Jingxuan Chen, Derek Yuen, Bin Xie, Yuhao Yang, Gongwei Chen, Zhihao Wu, Li Yixing, Xurui Zhou, Weiwen Liu, Shuai Wang, and 1 others. 2025b. Spa-bench: A comprehensive benchmark for smartphone agent evaluation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Pengzhou Cheng, Zheng Wu, Zongru Wu, Aston Zhang, Zhuosheng Zhang, and Gongshen Liu. 2025a. Os-kairos: Adaptive interaction for mllm-powered gui agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16465 .Ziming Cheng, Zhiyuan Huang, Junting Pan, Zhaohui Hou, and Mingjie Zhan. 2025b. Navi-plus: Manag-ing ambiguous gui navigation tasks with follow-up. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24180 .Herbert H Clark. 1996. Using language . Cambridge university press. Jiazheng Kang, Mingming Ji, Zhe Zhao, and Ting Bai. 2025. Memory os of ai agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06326 .Wei Li, William E Bishop, Alice Li, Christopher Rawles, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, Divya Tyamagundlu, and 36083 Oriana Riva. 2024a. On the effects of data scale on ui control agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:92130–92154. Wei Li, Renshan Zhang, Rui Shao, Jie He, and Liqiang Nie. 2025. Cogvla: Cognition-aligned vision-language-action model via instruction-driven routing & sparsification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Zaijing Li, Yuquan Xie, Rui Shao, Gongwei Chen, Dongmei Jiang, and Liqiang Nie. 2024b. Optimus-1: Hybrid multimodal memory empowered agents excel in long-horizon tasks. Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems , 37:49881–49913. Lin Long, Yichen He, Wentao Ye, Yiyuan Pan, Yuan Lin, Hang Li, Junbo Zhao, and Wei Li. 2025. See-ing, listening, remembering, and reasoning: A multi-modal agent with long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09736 .Quanfeng Lu, Wenqi Shao, Zitao Liu, Lingxiao Du, Fan-qing Meng, Boxuan Li, Botong Chen, Siyuan Huang, Kaipeng Zhang, and Ping Luo. 2025a. Guiodyssey: A comprehensive dataset for cross-app gui navigation on mobile devices. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 22404–22414. Yaxi Lu, Shenzhi Yang, Cheng Qian, Guirong Chen, Qinyu Luo, Yesai Wu, Huadong Wang, Xin Cong, Zhong Zhang, Yankai Lin, and 1 others. 2025b. Proactive agent: Shifting llm agents from reactive responses to active assistance. In The Thirteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations .Cheng Qian, Bingxiang He, Zhong Zhuang, Jia Deng, Yujia Qin, Xin Cong, Zhong Zhang, Jie Zhou, Yankai Lin, Zhiyuan Liu, and 1 others. 2024. Tell me more! towards implicit user intention understand-ing of language model driven agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09205 .Yujia Qin, Yining Ye, Junjie Fang, Haoming Wang, Shihao Liang, Shizuo Tian, Junda Zhang, Jiahao Li, Yunxin Li, Shijue Huang, and 1 others. 2025. Ui-tars: Pioneering automated gui interaction with native agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12326 .Christopher Rawles, Sarah Clinckemaillie, Yifan Chang, Jonathan Waltz, Gabrielle Lau, Marybeth Fair, Alice Li, William E Bishop, Wei Li, Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala, and 1 others. Androidworld: A dynamic benchmarking environment for autonomous agents. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Christopher Rawles, Alice Li, Daniel Rodriguez, Ori-ana Riva, and Timothy Lillicrap. 2023. An-droidinthewild: A large-scale dataset for android device control. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36:59708–59728. Yunxiao Shi, Wujiang Xu, Zeqi Zhang, Xing Zi, Qiang Wu, and Min Xu. 2025. Personax: A rec-ommendation agent oriented user modeling frame-work for long behavior sequence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02398 .Haoming Wang, Haoyang Zou, Huatong Song, Jiazhan Feng, Junjie Fang, Junting Lu, Longxiang Liu, Qinyu Luo, Shihao Liang, Shijue Huang, and 1 others. 2025a. Ui-tars-2 technical report: Advancing gui agent with multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02544 .Lu Wang, Di Zhang, Fangkai Yang, Pu Zhao, Jianfeng Liu, Yuefeng Zhan, Hao Sun, Qingwei Lin, Wei-wei Deng, Dongmei Zhang, and 1 others. 2025b. Lettingo: Explore user profile generation for recom-mendation system. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2 , pages 2985–2995. Zheng Wu, Heyuan Huang, Yanjia Yang, Yuanyi Song, Xingyu Lou, Weiwen Liu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Zhuosheng Zhang. 2025. Quick on the uptake: Eliciting implicit intents from human demonstrations for personalized mobile-use agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08645 .Zhiyong Wu, Zhenyu Wu, Fangzhi Xu, Yian Wang, Qiushi Sun, Chengyou Jia, Kanzhi Cheng, Zichen Ding, Liheng Chen, Paul Pu Liang, and Yu Qiao. 2024. OS-ATLAS: A Foundation Action Model for Generalist GUI Agents. arXiv preprint .ArXiv:2410.23218 [cs]. Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh J Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, and 1 others. 2024. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:52040–52094. Yuquan Xie, Zaijing Li, Rui Shao, Gongwei Chen, Kai-wen Zhou, Yinchuan Li, Dongmei Jiang, and Liqiang Nie. 2025. Mirage-1: Augmenting and updating gui agent with hierarchical multimodal skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10387 .Sikuan Yan, Xiufeng Yang, Zuchao Huang, Ercong Nie, Zifeng Ding, Zonggen Li, Xiaowen Ma, Hin-rich Schütze, Volker Tresp, and Yunpu Ma. 2025. Memory-r1: Enhancing large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19828 .Bufang Yang, Lilin Xu, Liekang Zeng, Kaiwei Liu, Siyang Jiang, Wenrui Lu, Hongkai Chen, Xiaofan Jiang, Guoliang Xing, and Zhenyu Yan. 2025a. Con-textagent: Context-aware proactive llm agents with open-world sensory perceptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14668 .Qinglong Yang, Haoming Li, Haotian Zhao, Xiaokai Yan, Jingtao Ding, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. 2025b. Fingertip 20k: A benchmark for proactive and 36084 personalized mobile llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21071 .Jiabo Ye, Xi Zhang, Haiyang Xu, Haowei Liu, Jun-yang Wang, Zhaoqing Zhu, Ziwei Zheng, Feiyu Gao, Junjie Cao, Zhengxi Lu, and 1 others. 2025. Mobile-agent-v3: Fundamental agents for gui automation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15144 .Hongli Yu, Tinghong Chen, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Weinan Dai, Qiying Yu, Ya-Qin Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, and 1 others. 2025. Memagent: Reshaping long-context llm with multi-conv rl-based memory agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02259 .Yanzhao Zhang, Mingxin Li, Dingkun Long, Xin Zhang, Huan Lin, Baosong Yang, Pengjun Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Junyang Lin, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 embedding: Advancing text embedding and reranking through foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05176 .Zijian Zhou, Ao Qu, Zhaoxuan Wu, Sunghwan Kim, Alok Prakash, Daniela Rus, Jinhua Zhao, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, and Paul Pu Liang. 2025. Mem1: Learning to synergize memory and reason-ing for efficient long-horizon agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15841 .Yijie Zhu, Jie He, Rui Shao, Kaishen Yuan, Tao Tan, Xiaochen Yuan, and Zitong Yu. 2026a. Deltavla: Prior-guided vision-language-action mod-els via world knowledge variation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08361 .Yijie Zhu, Rui Shao, Ziyang Liu, Jie He, Jizhihui Liu, Jiuru Wang, and Zitong Yu. 2026b. H-gar: A hierarchical interaction framework via goal-driven observation-action refinement for robotic manipula-tion. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .36085 A Experiment Details 

A.1 Baselines 

In our evaluation on AndroidIntent, we select a diverse set of GUI agent models, including open-source agents such as UI-TARS-7B (Qin et al., 2025), GUI-Owl-7B (Ye et al., 2025), and Qwen-3-VL-8B (Bai et al., 2025a), alongside several propri-etary GUI Agent models, including the GPT-5.1 1,GLM-4.5V, and QwenVL-MAX 2. We evaluate their GUI execution performance when transition-ing from complete to incomplete instructions, and also assess their ability to proactively provide sug-gestions. 

A.2 Implementation details 

All GUI agent execution experiments were con-ducted on an NVIDIA A100 (40GB) GPU. And we select GPT-5.1 for LLM-UM. During the filter-ing process, we set k = 10 for the top-k selection. When computing Qscore , we use a weighted sum of [1,0.1,0.1] and then normalization. Notably, differ-ent weight combinations can yield approximately normal-shaped distributions; we select this config-uration to produce clearer decision boundaries, and we also slightly expand the filtering range for mo-ment and preference intent to 0.6 in this setting. Additionally, both θ in Streaming Aggregation and the proactive boundary threshold in the State-based Routine Filter were both set to 0.6. For CSR, we apply an exponential decay to the length of each trajectory and then perform normalized weighting of SSR. Furthermore, we visualize different hyper-parameter combinations of Qscore in Figure 8. It can be observed that the three Gaussian-like dis-tributions remain clearly separable across multiple settings, indicating that our filtering strategy is ro-bust to hyperparameter choices. Finally, we select a configuration with relatively clear boundary sep-aration for manual annotation in this paper. 

A.3 Online Evaluation 

In this paper, we mainly adopt an offline GUI eval-uation setting. On the other hand, since a user’s intent can often be achieved through multiple valid trajectories, online evaluation is also suitable. How-ever, unlike simulator-based benchmarks such as AndroidWorld (Rawles et al.), evaluating on An-droidIntent requires connecting to real physical de-vices via Android Debug Bridge (ADB), as many 

> 1gpt-5.1-2025-11-13
> 2qwen-vl-max(stable)

daily apps cannot run on emulators due to privacy and security restrictions. Moreover, the evaluation results cannot be auto-matically verified by Android APIs to determine whether the user intent is successfully completed. Instead, each execution must be manually inspected to assess the agent’s behavior. In addition, real-device evaluation is affected by various factors such as app versions, mobile models, and runtime envi-ronments. Since online evaluation is still not sufficiently stable or scalable under these constraints, we pri-marily adopt offline evaluation to ensure a more objective and reproducible assessment. 

B More Analysis 

As shown in Table 4, we observe that most ex-isting GUI agents still struggle to effectively per-form proactive behaviors based on user history. To further analyze, we additionally evaluate several models with stronger long-context understanding capabilities. As reported in Table 8, Gemini3-Pro also demonstrates relatively strong proactive perfor-mance under the same prompt. In contrast, models from the Qwen series (e.g., Qwen-3 and Qwen-Max) tend to behave overly aggressively under the same prompts, frequently triggering proactive ac-tions and thus leading to a high false-alarm rate. Future research on end-to-end or on-device per-sonal GUI agents should not only focus on execu-tion success rates, but also carefully consider the model’s ability to understand and reason over long-term context, which is crucial for analyzing user record context. 

C Personal Agent Settings 

With long-term user records, we can further envi-sion more intelligent personal agents that provide personalized assistance in everyday life, similar to 

Jarvis , which offers highly customized and proac-tive services. 

C.1 Personalized Rewriting 

Preference inference can also be implemented via a query rewriting strategy. Specifically, we feed the user’s vague instruction together with histori-cal records into an LLM to perform Personalized Rewriting, which can be formulated as: 

I′ 

> re

← fθ( ˆI; {(Ii, T i, S t)} ∈ H ). (8) 36086 [1,0.05,0.05]  [1,0.1,0.1] 

> (Selected)
> [1,0.15,0.15]

Figure 8: Different combination weights of Qscore .Table 8: Comparison of more models in proactive capability.                                 

> Model Intent Alignment Identification Alignment Semantic Judgment Precision Recall False-Alarm ↓F1-score
> GPT-5.1 49.4% 32.0% 73.1% 78.6% 62.0% 75.8% Gemini3-Pro 53.5% 37.0% 74.7% 77.8% 57.0% 76.2% Qwen-Max 53.6% 35.4% 68.7% 93.1% 92.0% 79.1%
> Qwen3-8B 49.3% 26.8% 69.5% 95.4% 90.0% 80.3%

where I′ 

> re

means LLM rewrite instruction. How-ever, this approach introduces an additional in-ference stage and intermediate variables, thereby breaking the end-to-end nature of GUI agents. More importantly, it only enables personalization at the instruction-level. In contrast, PersonalAlign supports finer-grained personalization at the action-level, providing more direct control over execution behaviors. 

C.2 Proactive Triggering 

From a user-centric perspective, proactive agents can also be designed in a trigger-based paradigm. Specifically, by summarizing historical interaction records, the agent can learn a set of trigger states defined by specific temporal and contextual con-ditions under which recommendations should be initiated. This can be formulated as: 

(T ′ 

> t

, S ′

> t

) ← fθ(I∅; {(Ii, T i, S i)} ∈ H ). (9) In this setting, the agent does not need to continu-ously reason over the current state at every moment; instead, it activates recommendations only when predefined trigger conditions are met. However, evaluating such a framework requires an online-like environment, where a User Agent (Lu et al., 2025b) should be constructed to simu-late user behavior by triggering predefined states and providing accept or reject feedback. Overall, compared to real-time reasoning, this trigger-based paradigm is more efficient and represents a promis-ing direction for future work. 

C.3 Proactive Executing 

Imagine a future scenario: upon arriving at the office, your phone is already unlocked and wait-ing at the relevant workspace interface; or when you leave the company, the navigation app auto-matically opens and sets the route home. This represents a more forward-looking paradigm of in-teraction, which we refer to as Proactive Executing, which can be formulated as: 

At ← f (I∅; {(Ii, T i, S i)} ∈ H ). (10) Such proactive agents constitute a more ad-vanced instantiation of HIM-Agent. This paradigm goes beyond reactive or recommendation-based behaviors by anticipating user needs and execut-ing actions autonomously. However, realizing and evaluating such capabilities requires an online eval-uation environment, along with a simulated user agent capable of modeling realistic acceptance or rejection behaviors. As GUI Agents continue to advance in capability, we envision that stronger personalization, contex-tual awareness Proactive Executing Agents will become achievable. This represents a promising direction toward truly intelligent and personalized human–agent interaction. At present, such a setting remains challenging to realize in practice. Therefore, in PersonalAlign, we restrict proactive behavior to the instruction level, where we evaluate the agent’s ability to predict user intent rather than executing actions autonomously. On the other hand, proactive decision-making can also be informed by richer signals; in AndroidIn-tent, we primarily focus on the user’s interaction 36087 time and scenario, leaving the incorporation of ad-ditional factors to future work. 

D Annotator Requirements 

Here, we present the requirements provided to the annotators. To better support them in verifying candidate results, we also design an interactive in-terface that facilitates faster and more efficient an-notation. We recruited a group of student annotators living in China to annotate and provided compensation that aligns with local living wage standards. The an-notation workload during the verifying stage was intentionally kept lightweight, as we designed a user-friendly interface to assist the annotation pro-cess and reduce cognitive burden. This design en-sured that the workload remained reasonable while maintaining annotation quality. 

You are provided with a ranked list of historical records, ordered by their relevance to the current intent. For each record, you can view the interaction time, scenario, and action. You should determine which type of user behavior the current intent belongs to, based on the user's history. We define three types of user intents: 1. Moment Intent If the current intent rarely appears or does not appear in the history, and you believe that a complete and explicit description is required for the agent to execute it correctly. 2. Preference Intent If similar intent have appeared multiple times in history, and you believe the user has performed this action repeatedly, such that only minimal information is needed and the remaining details can be inferred from past interactions. After selecting this option, you are required to choose one personalized instruction from the provided vague instruction candidates that you think the user would most likely give. If none are suitable, you may also write your own possible instructions. 3. Routine Intent If the intent has appeared many times in nearly identical forms, and you believe the user has performed it frequently enough that the agent can infer the intent directly from historical patterns, especially from the time and scenario, without any additional information. Except for the preference intent, no additional instruction selection is required. After finishing the annotation for one intent, you can click `next `, and the interface will automatically update the intent and user history. If you are uncertain about a case, you may also mark it as uncertain for further review. 

E Prompt for Agents 

E.1 Prompt for LLM-UM 

Prompt for the preference interaction summary: 

You will serve as an assistant to help me summarize a user's preferences based on his/her long-term GUI usage records. I will provide you with the user's brief profile amd long-term interaction history. From this history, you need to extract the user's preferences regarding apps or items. ## Requirements: 1. Please provide your output in JSON format, following this structure: {"summaries": [ {"reasoning": "Briefly explain your reasoning for the preference", "preference": "A concise summary of what types of apps/items this user is likely to enjoy, e.g. 'User preference for shopping with App A'", "confidence": "High/Medium/Low", "action": "Summarize one User's usual execution actions trajectory from `

action_list `, e.g. ['click(x1, y1)', 'wait() ', 'finished()']" (if you are unable to determine the preference, please set this value to "None") }, ]}2. Ensure that each "preference" is highly concise. It should clearly describe one app + one specific type of task/content the user prefers. 3. You must provide multiple preference-reasoning pairs with JSON format in "summaries". Each preference should reference only one app 4. The answer should be in Chinese. However, " action" field must keep the original English types from the `action_list `.5. Do not provide any text outside of the JSON string. 6. Additional requirement: - If several apps appear interchangeable but one is used significantly more often for a specific task, treat that as a preference. - Avoid fabricating preferences when evidence is weak; use 'None' when uncertain. ## User Profile: {profile} ## User History: {previous_intents} 36088 E.2 Prompt for Proactive 

You are skilled at analyzing user history. You are given summarized user's daily routine. Your task is to determine whether the current user state requires proactive suggestions. ## Note - You are given summarized user routines, each describing a frequent user behavior with its intent, time/scenario distribution, and frequency. - If neither the time nor the scenario shows a sufficiently strong match with any summarized routine, output False. - If you decide that a recommendation is needed, output a suitable user instruction for the GUI agent to execute. - Express the user's intent unvaguely in one Chinese sentence, ensuring the expression faithfully reflects the user's original intent without adding any extra description. - Do not output any explanation, including time and scenario information. Imitate the user's intent and output only one proactive suggestion. ## Input Time: {time} Scenario: {scenario} Summarized_routine: {generalized_routine} The user's intent: 

F AI Assistant 

We used AI assistants only for minor writing assis-tance during manuscript preparation. 36089